---
modified:
  - 2026-03-31T20:31:51+02:00
  - 2026-03-30T20:27:28+02:00
  - 2026-03-26T15:39:47+01:00
  - 2026-03-30T17:56:47+02:00
  - 2026-04-01T14:07:50+02:00
created: 2026-03-26T15:27:47+01:00
tags:
  - MHH
---
- Consider starting with whether already reverted cells can be cultured and passaged in new media to allow for much greater parallelization.
- Robustness should be the key readout, as the full quantitative range of readout parameters is hard to quantify. 
## Message to Jay 2026-04-01
Dear Jay,

My new job revolves around translating promising protocols for the production of cell therapy products from a research scale to a bioreactor scale. Materials have to be translated from research-grade to good-manufacturing-practice grade. This encompasses Hetavi's project, in which she will optimize the reprogramming efficiency of iPSC using episomal vectors. These campaigns have in common that the targets, objectives, and a suite of critical parameters can be clearly defined *a priori* but that their optimal combination is unclear. This makes them uniquely suited to Design of Experiment approaches. 

After educating myself on the basics of DoE architectures, I believe that Bayesian Optimization is the most suitable for my optimization problem; primarily due to its iterative nature in an environment of little to no preliminary data required for formal power calculations. The biotech giant Merck has recently published and is actively maintaining their software package *BayBE* optimized for Bayesian Optimization in a low data environment as an [open source software](https://emdgroup.github.io/baybe/stable/index.html). BayBE offers a broad suite of customization options and requires only beginner-level coding proficiency on the user side. A demonstration of its core functionalities can be found [here](https://pubs.rsc.org/en/content/articlehtml/2025/dd/d5dd00050e). 

I can outline my core parameters and targets of interest but struggle to tie down a the exact objective and acquisition function. I'm at a point where *ich seh den Wald vor lauter Bäumen nicht mehr*. Are you interested in consulting on this DoE set-up?

I am currently finishing a few publications from my postdoctoral fellowship, after which I plan to apply for a number of grants. I will certainly include DoE in at least one grant application, either for reprogramming or more likely for optimization of culture conditions for GMP-grade production. If you're interested, I'd be delighted to include you as a consultant on one of the grants. If this goes very well, the DoE aspect *may* lead to its own spin-off publication. More likely, it will be absorbed into a bigger paper of *how to do naive pluripotent stem cell culture and differentiation, but better?* In either case, it will be years before a publication.

I'm including a brief outline of an optimization campaign I plan to perform, including unpublished info. I'll appreciate any hunch you might have or tips you can give right off the bat.

TLDR: I am facing an optimization problem of optimizing an experimental protocol so that it produces a certain cellular status in most cell lines, and 2) it produces this status particularly well in those cell lines. The search space is hybrid discrete-continuous with 1-2 target variables and 30-60 parameters, depending on encoding. The space is very noisy, optima are likely rather narrow, parallel testing is limited to about 4 experiments per batch, and performing one batch takes at least 2 weeks, often 3-4. Yes, it does sound terrible when I write it out like that. 

- Background: 
	- I have a cell culture protocol that produces incredibly potent stem cells. 
	- The protocol induces some critical phase transition during the first 1-3 weeks of culture, in which most cells either chaotically differentiate or die. The cells that make it out of this selection step undifferentiated and alive are incredibly potent for downstream applications and form the backbone of my work. 
	- Some cell lines are so volatile between differentiation and cell death that it becomes impractical to select the few undifferentiated and viable colonies during the critical phase. These cell lines are currently non-permissive for this protocol. Within cell lines, their *permissiveness* is somewhat stable, indicating that *permissiveness* is either determined by genetic or a stable epigenetic features, or a combination of both. 
	- During the critical phase, it is regularly necessary to hand-pick promising colonies, meaning that parallelization of experiments is limited by my lab time. This will limit batches to about 4 parallel runs, each taking 2-4 weeks.
	- My hypothesis is that a configuration of parameters can be found that works for most cell lines. The goal is to subtly change the original protocol to 1) enable its facile use with most cell lines, 2) without the need for manual colony picking, which becomes impractical at an industrial scale. 
- Target: The actual outcome variable I care about is reduced lineage bias of differentiation, as well as lesser apoptosis and increased proliferation of differentiated cells. Measuring these directly takes weeks and introduces even more noise. However, there are good molecular surrogates for the cell state of interest: Undifferentiated cells and only undifferentiated cells reliably express the gene NANOG before and after the critical phase transition. After the transition, *good* colonies also express a few other rare genes (with *type of measurement*), including ZSCAN4 (rt-qPCR), the HERV cluster (rt-qPCR or reporter genes) and phosphorylated STAT6 (fluorescence labeled antibodies). Bulk transcriptomic analyses of 8 matched cell lines before and after phase transition are available for additional marker gene selection.
- Parameters:
	- oxygen fraction, continuous numerical, 3-21%. Cardinality constraint together with carbon dioxide below: I only have 2 incubators, each can have exactly one gas setting, meaning that 2 gas settings can be tried per batch.
	- carbon-dioxide fraction, continuous numerical. The CO2 fraction also controls the pH in the media as a function of the bicarbonate content in the media. This could be turned into a custom constraint that restricts the pH to a near-physiological range of 7.25-7.55, calculated using the Henderson-Hasselbach equation, the bicarbonate concentration of the base media, and the CO2 gas fraction. One could also fully fix the CO2 parameter, derived from the bicarboate content in the base media and a target pH of 7.4.
	- Base media under mixture and cardinality constraint. Could be Continuous Numerical, but I would rather custom encode the media components, like Glucose, Sodium, Potassium, Magnesium, Pyruvate, Bicarbonate, etc. ([Example Formulation](https://www.thermofisher.com/de/de/home/technical-resources/media-formulation.8.html)), of a handful of commercial culture media, like DMEM or F12, so that the software actually *knows* how similar different media are by their formulation without including the formulation on the front-end (and without formulating custom media other than mixing commercial ones). Custom encoding is currently only possible for Discrete Numerical variables in BayBE; so I'd probably encode media mixtures in 5% steps or 2% steps, like 50% media A, 40% media B, 5% media C, 5% media D.
	- Complex supplements, like KOSR, N2, B27; if formulations are available, these can be custom encoded together with the base media. Some of these may be a black box as to their exact contents and must be encoded as their own black box continuous numerical parameters.
	- Albumin concentration, most likely in the form of BSA, weight per volume. Continuous Numerical.
	- Growth factor concentrations, Continuous Numerical, weight per volume: LIF, Insulin.
	- Micronutrient concentrations, Continuous Numerical, weight per volume: Transferrin, Selenium, Ethanolamid, Ascorbic Acid-Phosphate, L-Glutamine, Non-Essential Aminoacids (the latter two possibly custom encoded together with base media to capture the total concentrations of the contained amino acids also contained in the base media).
	- Small molecules as continuous numerical variables, weight per volume: XAV939, PD0325901, Gö6983, CHIR99021.
	- Potentially more small molecules and growth factors from other publications as continuous numerical variables, weight per volume: DZNep, Trichostatin A, IWR-1, b-mercaptoethanol, IM-12, SB590885, WH-4-023, Y-27632, SP600125, SB203560, valproic acid, (S)-(+)-dimethindene maleate, minocycline hydrochloride, TGFb, Activin A, bFGF; all of these could alternatively be reserved for later-phases, see **Campaign design** below. 
	- Potentially different growth matrices, like Vitronectin, Fibronectin, Matrigel, Geltrex; one-hot categorical.
- Objective:
	I'm listing a number of possible objectives below.
	- pass-fail per cell line: define cell lines as one-hot encoded categorical parameters. Perform the model-recommended experiments with the model-recommended cell lines at a specified total batch size / parallelity. For each configuration, return whether a quality criterion was passed, e.g., >90% NANOG/pSTAT6 co-expressing cells after 3 passages as single outcome variable. Pro: Cell line specific learning by the model. Con: Binary outcome variable. Does not intrinsically capture robustness across cell lines but rather optimizes per cell line.
	- aggregate pass-fail: do not encode cell lines in the model. Let the model recommend one protocol per batch (as if there were no parallelity). Perform that single protocol with a maximum feasible number of cell lines, e.g., 4 lines in parallel. Return the number of cell lines that passed a quality criterion, e.g., >90% NANOG/pSTAT6 co-expressing cells after 3 passages as single outcome variable. Pro: This is the most important goal of the campaign. Con: Coarse outcome variable. How to choose which 4 cell lines to test the protocol with in parallel if >4 cell lines are available?
	- expression per cell line: define cell lines as one-hot encoded categorical parameters. Perform the model-recommended experiments with the model-recommended cell lines at a specified total batch size / parallelity. For each configuration, return the percentage of cells expressing NANOG/pSTAT6 or their mean expression level as single outcome variable. Pros: Fine-grained outcome variable. Cons: Does not intrinsically capture robustness across cell lines but rather optimizes per cell line. Also, it's not trivial to interpret differences within the mid-range of expressing cells, e.g., <30% of cell expressing the targets is certainly bad, >90% is certainly good, the midregion is hard to interpret. Might be solvable by sigmoid-transforming the outcome variable before maximizing. 
	- aggregate expression: do not encode cell lines in the model. Let the model recommend one protocol per batch (as if there were no parallelity). Perform this protocol with a maximum feasible number of cell lines, e.g., 4 lines in parallel. Return the percentage of cells expressing NANOG/pSTAT6 or the mean expression level of the median cell line regarding that variable, as a single outcome variable. Pros / Cons: The same as the previous 2 objectives. 
	- aggregate weighted mixed desirability objective: Do not encode cell lines in the model. Let the model recommend one protocol per batch (as if there were no parallelity). Perform this protocol with a maximum feasible number of cell lines per batch, e.g., 4 lines. Return two values, which are combined into a single desirability objective by the model: Outcome 1) the median of percentage of cells expressing NANOG/pSTAT6 or of their mean expression level. Outcome 2) number of cell lines above an expression threshold. Pros: The model optimizes for both high expression and robustness. Cons: Blinding the model to the cell lines introduces noise. Have to choose arbitrary numerical weights of outcomes 1 & 2. How to choose which 4 cell lines to test the protocol with in parallel if >4 cell lines are available?
	- pareto-objective: Like the aformentioned but using a pareto-front of expression versus fraction of lines for which the expression was above a threshold. Pros: Integrates an anticipated trade-off between performance and robustness. Cons: Blinding the model to the cell lines introduces noise. How to choose which 4 cell lines to test the protocol with in parallel if >4 cell lines are available?
- Acquisition functions; pros, cons:
	- qNoisyExpectedImprovement; pro: highest likelihood of converging to the global optimum in the lowest number of experiments. Pro: Can handle noise. Con: frustrating early exploration. 
	- Bandit models, e.g., Thompson sampling; pros: higher likelihood of finding a good solution in less tries. Pro: Can handle strong noise. Con: more required experiments to converge to the best solution. 
	- specialized acquisition functions, e.g., for pareto-optimization; depending on the objective, this meta-acquisition function may need to be chosen. I do not know if it can handle noise at least decently well. 
- Campaign design:
	- Single phase optimization: Set-up the campaign and only stop when reaching a pre-specified criterion. Problematic when encoding cell lines as one-hot parameters, because that will optimize for the best cell line with the best protocol, not for a protocol that works at least decently with most cell lines. 
	- Multi-Phase optimization via transfer learning with model-informed stopping criteria and search-space tuning. Whenever the model predicts less than a pre-specified expected improvement for the next batch recommended of experiments, model the failure probability for each cell line in the model, i.e., the probability that a given cell line produces an acceptable outcome with fixed other parameters. Eliminate cell lines that perform significantly worse than the bunch, then start a new campaign. If no cell line performs significantly worse than the bunch, consider adding a new parameter, like a new growth factor (see **small molecules and growth factors from other publications** above), then start a new campaign. In either case, transfer model parameters using BayBE's transfer-learning function. Stop when reaching a pre-specified meta-outcome, e.g., all remaining cell lines can be taken through the protocol without manual picking 2 times in a row. Potentially start a new campaign returning the cell lines that had previously been removed and see if they remain non-permissive. If yes, report non-permissive lines, correlate genetics / epigenetics with permissiveness to search for reasons, consider cell-line specific *fine tuning* in follow-up campaigns. 

Further reading:
- [Naïve Bayes Ant Colony Optimization for Experimental Design | Springer Nature Link](https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-642-33042-1_52)
- [Structured sampling strategies in Bayesian optimization: evaluation in mathematical and real-world scenarios | Journal of Intelligent Manufacturing | Springer Nature Link](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10845-025-02597-2)
- [Adaptive and Safe Bayesian Optimization in High Dimensions via One-Dimensional Subspaces](https://arxiv.org/abs/1902.03229)
- [BoTorch: A Framework for Efficient Monte-Carlo Bayesian Optimization](https://arxiv.org/abs/1910.06403)
- [Ant colony optimization for learning Bayesian networks - ScienceDirect](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0888613X02000919)
- [Batch Bayesian Optimization via Local Penalization](https://arxiv.org/abs/1505.08052)
- [Bayesian optimization with adaptive surrogate models for automated experimental design | npj Computational Materials](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41524-021-00662-x)
- [Bayesian optimization with known experimental and design constraints for chemistry applications - ScienceDirect](https://www.sciencedirect.com/org/science/article/pii/S2635098X23000608)
- [Constrained Bayesian Optimization with Noisy Experiments](https://arxiv.org/abs/1706.07094)
- [Ant Colony Optimization Algorithm for Interpretable Bayesian Classifiers Combination: Application to Medical Predictions | PLOS One](https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0086456)
- [Robust Experimental Design via Generalised Bayesian Inference | Cool Papers - Immersive Paper Discovery](https://papers.cool/arxiv/2511.07671#:~:text=In%20this%20work%2C%20we%20present%20Generalised%20Bayesian%20Optimal,which%20achieves%20robustness%20in%20both%20design%20and%20inference.)
- [Robust Experimental Design via Generalised Bayesian Inference | Cool Papers - Immersive Paper Discovery](https://papers.cool/arxiv/2511.07671#:~:text=In%20this%20work%2C%20we%20present%20Generalised%20Bayesian%20Optimal,which%20achieves%20robustness%20in%20both%20design%20and%20inference.)
- [Robust Multi-Objective Bayesian Optimization Under Input Noise](https://arxiv.org/abs/2202.07549)
- [Measurements with noise: Bayesian optimization for co-optimizing noise and property discovery in automated experiments - ScienceDirect](https://www.sciencedirect.com/org/science/article/pii/S2635098X25000385)
- [Bayesian optimization for robust engineering design with noise factors | IEEE Conference Publication | IEEE Xplore](https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/10092640)
- [Learning Relevant Contextual Variables Within Bayesian Optimization](https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.14120)
- [On the development of a practical Bayesian optimization algorithm for expensive experiments and simulations with changing environmental conditions | Data-Centric Engineering | Cambridge Core](https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/data-centric-engineering/article/on-the-development-of-a-practical-bayesian-optimization-algorithm-for-expensive-experiments-and-simulations-with-changing-environmental-conditions/2E8B11AA8E025997912F3FAB52DFE798)
- [Rationalised experiment design for parameter estimation with sensitivity clustering | Scientific Reports](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-024-75539-2)
- [Structured sampling strategies in Bayesian optimization: evaluation in mathematical and real-world scenarios | Journal of Intelligent Manufacturing | Springer Nature Link](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10845-025-02597-2)

Options with BayBE:
- Objective:
	- Define a multi-objective campaign with 2 or more outcome variables, e.g., NANOG<sub>pos</sub> purity [%] at passage 5 as high-weight objective, mean HERV promoter activity (reporter line?) as medium-high weight objective, and NANOG/HERV<sub>pos/pos</sub> total cell number at p5 as lower weight objective, compounded using BayBE's [desirability objective](https://emdgroup.github.io/baybe/stable/userguide/objectives#DesirabilityObjective)
	- Design a [pareto-objective](https://emdgroup.github.io/baybe/stable/userguide/objectives#ParetoObjective.html/) that encodes performance, e.g., NANOG/HERV expression, and robustness, i.e., stability across cell lines, as separate objectives for pareto-optimization. Question: How to encode robustness, which is a function of performance over different cell lines, in this case?
	- Optimize cell line by cell line, or batch of cell lines by batch of cell lines, passing information using the [Transfer Learning](https://emdgroup.github.io/baybe/stable/userguide/transfer_learning.html) function until somewhat like an implicit standard emerges, that can be applied to any or to most cell lines with little line-specific optimization. Note that this could also serve as an alternative phase 1 before a separate robustness optimization; see below. Question: How to formalize when such a baseline protocol has emerged. 
	- Define a single-objective campaign with a self-calculated composite outcome, e.g., NANOG<sub>pos</sub> cell numbers at p5 x NANOG<sub>pos</sub> purity X%<sup>2</sup> to exclude failed campaigns. This completely blinds BayBE to the existence of multiple cell lines, thereby increasing noise but baking robustness into one central combined objective.
	- As an extension of the aforementioned *homebrew* design, once could instead build a two-phase design, in which a number of n+1 TaskParameters is defined for n cell lines of interest. In phase 1, only cell lines K<sub>1</sub> through K<sub>n</sub> are active. Then, K<sub>1</sub> through K<sub>n</sub> are inactivated, any cell lines that never worked are dropped, and the virtual cell line K<sub>n+1</sub> is activated, which reports a self-calculated composite outcome of performance across cell lines K<sub>1</sub> through K<sub>n-dropouts</sub>, for example by passing the second-worst performance of all tested cell lines to BayBE. 
	- A generalized case of the multi-phase optimization would be to define a stopping criterion that either requires dropping a cell line or fundamentally changing the campaign, e.g., adding a new small molecule or growth factor or dropping a cell line, as per human interpretation, before initiating a new campaign encompassing these changes and benefitting from transfer learning from the previous campaign. 
	- Targets: Numerical targets are likely transformed using a [ramp transformation](https://emdgroup.github.io/baybe/stable/userguide/targets#Ramp%20Transformation.html) or sigmoid transformation with optimal values >=0.95 (purity of NANOG/HERV expressing cells) versus linearly maximizing either the purity of expressing cells or of the expression value, e.g., of HERV. If I understand correctly, passing a [sigmoid transformation](https://emdgroup.github.io/baybe/stable/userguide/transformations.html) before maximization may encode the biological reality that many combinations will not work but some will, i.e, that values of 10 vs 20 vs 30% purity are all equally worthless and values of 90, 93, and 96% are all almost perfect, while values between 70 and 90% may represent gradual improvement worth looking into. This may prevent *hallucinations of gradual improvements* in the low efficiency range, slowing formal optimization but making it count towards actual biological progress. Also see [Composite Transformations](https://emdgroup.github.io/baybe/stable/userguide/transformations#Composite_Transformations.html), e.g., clamping to >40% and then sigmoid with a mid-log point somewhere around 80%.
	- is it possible to estimate / trail a failure rate per cell line and optimize for high compound performance and low compound failure rate over all selected cell lines using a pareto objective?
	
- Parameters: 
	- Define base media as continuous variables, each bound 0-1, constrained to sum to 1.
	- Define base media as discrete numerical parameters, each bound 0-1 in 0.05 steps, constrained to sum to 1 using the *SubspaceDiscrete.from_simplex* function, and custom encoded with their media components using the CustomDiscreteParameters function to capture similarity between media.
- Set Up:
	- Rather use [qNoisyExpectedImprovement](https://emdgroup.github.io/baybe/stable/_autosummary/baybe.acquisition.acqfs.qNoisyExpectedImprovement.html#baybe.acquisition.acqfs.qNoisyExpectedImprovement "baybe.acquisition.acqfs.qNoisyExpectedImprovement") instead of [active learning](https://emdgroup.github.io/baybe/latest/userguide/active_learning.html) to optimize for the outcome encompassing noisy uncertainty, instead of primarily exploring the space. 
	- Test the final code using the [simulation function](https://emdgroup.github.io/baybe/stable/userguide/simulation.html) for example by using the [Branin function](https://www.sfu.ca/~ssurjano/branin.html) as look-up and [fake noise](https://emdgroup.github.io/baybe/stable/userguide/utils.html) or by pulling some real-word data of fully realized DOE experiments from [Fitzner et al.](https://pubs.rsc.org/en/content/articlehtml/2025/dd/d5dd00050e#cit20)