## Robust Experimental Design via Generalised Bayesian Inference

## Yasir Zubayr Barlas

The University of Manchester

yasir.barlas@manchester.ac.uk

## Sabina J. Sloman

The University of Manchester sabina.sloman@manchester.ac.uk

## Samuel Kaski

Aalto University The University of Manchester samuel.kaski@manchester.ac.uk

## Abstract

Bayesian optimal experimental design is a principled framework for conducting experiments that leverages Bayesian inference to quantify how much information one can expect to gain from selecting a certain design. However, accurate Bayesian inference relies on the assumption that one's statistical model of the data-generating process is correctly specified. If this assumption is violated, Bayesian methods can lead to poor inference and estimates of information gain. Generalised Bayesian (or Gibbs) inference is a more robust probabilistic inference framework that replaces the likelihood in the Bayesian update by a suitable loss function. In this work, we present Generalised Bayesian Optimal Experimental Design (GBOED) , an extension of Gibbs inference to the experimental design setting which achieves robustness in both design and inference. Using an extended information-theoretic framework, we derive a new acquisition function, the Gibbs expected information gain (Gibbs EIG) . Our empirical results demonstrate that GBOED enhances robustness to outliers and incorrect assumptions about the outcome noise distribution.

## 1 Introduction

Many real-world settings are characterised by heavy resource and time constraints on data collection. In these cases, effective learning requires practitioners to carefully select these scarce data to maximise their learning objectives. Bayesian (optimal) experimental design (BOED) is a framework to optimise data acquisition in such settings (Atkinson and Donev, 1992; Ryan et al., 2016; Rainforth et al., 2024; Huan et al., 2024). The framework has found application in scores of disciplines, such as systems biology (Busetto et al., 2013; Pauwels et al., 2014), psychology (Myung et al., 2013; Valentin et al., 2021), and (medical) imaging (Karimi et al., 2021; Hyvönen et al., 2024).

BOED leverages Bayesian inference to update beliefs about parameters of interest (Rainforth et al., 2024). A key assumption is that the data are generated by a statistical model whose structure is known and under certain (unknown) parameter values. The goal of Bayesian inference is to identify these parameter values by constructing a posterior distribution on the basis of observed data.

BOED extends Bayesian inference to specify how the modeller wishes to allocate their resources to set the design. In BOED, one sets the design that maximises an objective of interest, cast as a utility function , enabling experiments to be optimally conducted according to this objective. The optimal design depends on the state of the world, of which we are uncertain; Bayesian inference offers a coherent approach to modelling this uncertainty. A common utility function is the expected

information gain (Lindley, 1956), which assesses the expected amount of information obtained about the parameters of interest. Thus, in the context of BOED, the modeller relies on the model twice : to design experiments, and to make inferences.

The assumption that the assumed statistical model is well-specified - i.e., that the model is able to accurately capture the true data-generating process (DGP) - is often broken in the real world. If accurate domain knowledge is available, scientists often choose to represent this domain knowledge as simple and tractable models that exclude some aspects of reality due to scientific uncertainty or for the sake of interpretability. Often, accurate domain knowledge is simply unavailable.

Model misspecification refers to the case where (due to intentional simplification and/or unavailable domain knowledge) the assumed statistical model cannot fully capture the true DGP (Walker, 2013). Even in standard data collection settings, model misspecification detrimentally affects inferences made through the Bayesian framework (Berk, 1966; Kleijn and van der Vaart, 2012). In the BOED context, it can also affect the optimality of the design sequence through uninformative or misleading design choices (Vincent and Rainforth, 2017; Sloman et al., 2022; Tang et al., 2025).

The possible damaging effect of model misspecification on the effectiveness of BOED is demonstrated in Figure 1. The top row shows the designs selected by BOED over the course of an experiment designed to locate two signal-emitting objects (red crosses) on the basis of the signal intensity measured at selected locations on a pre-defined grid. When the model is well-specified, BOED selects designs that cluster around the objects, providing the experimenter with ample information to precisely locate the objects. On the other hand, when the model is misspecified, the designs cluster around regions in which no objects are present. The misspecified model's inability to accurately assess the information available at a given location results in the design selection method it informs bringing the experimenter sequentially further from the objects.

A design selection method robust to model misspecification would be less easily misled by an inaccurate model. The bottom row of Figure 1 shows the sequence of designs selected by our method, generalised BOED (GBOED). As a result of GBOED's 'awareness' that the model that informs it has a limited ability to assess potential information gains, GBOED explores more of the design space, i.e., the designs it selects do not cluster around a single area as often as BOED.

Whilst model misspecification in BOED has received considerable attention, comparatively little work has explored generalised Bayesian inference (or Gibbs inference ; Bissiri et al., 2016; Knoblauch et al., 2022) in the context of experimental design, despite its robustness to misspecified statistical models when updating beliefs about parameters of interest. In Gibbs inference, a loss function replaces the likelihood in the traditional Bayesian update. Gibbs inference has offered promising theoretical and empirical results (Knoblauch et al., 2022; Martin and Syring, 2022) as an alternative to Bayesian inference in the presence of model misspecification.

In this work, we extend Gibbs inference to the experimental design setting, applying the Gibbs framework to both design selection and parameter inference. We introduce Generalised Bayesian Optimal Experimental Design (GBOED) , a novel framework that leverages Gibbs inference to address model misspecification. Implementation requires a user-specified loss function to account for challenges such as outliers in data. We consider the weighted score matching loss (Altamirano et al., 2024), well-suited to sequential applications such as experimental design, and propose a novel parameterisation of this function.

Our contributions are summarised by the following:

- 1. We propose a generalised BOED framework, GBOED, which seeks to tackle the model misspecification problem.
- 2. We introduce new, unconventional, information-theoretic concepts that enable the use of measures that arise in Gibbs inference that violate properties of probability density functions.
- 3. We derive a generalised form of the expected information gain, which we coin the Gibbs expected information gain , and present methods to approximate this utility.
- 4. We finally provide a number of empirical results, detailing the conditions under which it is advantageous to use GBOED over BOED, and to use our proposed utility over alternatives.

Figure 1: Designs selected by both BOED and GBOED in a 2D location finding example in wellspecified and misspecified scenarios. Designs that cluster around the objects (red crosses) are most informative in determining the objects' locations. Top left : In the well-specified setting, BOED selects designs that cluster around the objects. Top right : When the model is misspecified, BOED clusters around irrelevant regions with no objects. Bottom row : GBOED effectively avoids clustering in irrelevant regions.

picture-1.png

## 2 Preliminaries

## 2.1 Notation

Bolded capital Greek or Latin letters refer to random variables (rvs) (e.g., Θ is the rv assigned to the parameter space). Realisations of rvs are bolded lowercase (e.g., a realisation of Θ is θ ). Sets are expressed as calligraphic capital letters (e.g., θ can take values in the parameter space T ). E p ( x ) [ f ( x )] is the expectation of the function f ( x ) with respect to (wrt) the probability density function (pdf) p of values x . Unbolded capital Greek or Latin letters denote probability distributions.

## 2.2 Bayesian inference

The experimenter selects designs ξ which produce output data y . Stochasticity in the value of y is captured by the rv Y . They do not know the distribution underlying Y , but presume it in the form of a likelihood function p ( y | θ , ξ ) . We refer to the presumptive likelihood function as the statistical model .

In Bayesian inference (Gelman et al., 2013), the learner assigns a prior density π ( θ ) to their initial beliefs about the probabilities of values θ ∈ T . They subsequently update this prior to a posterior density p ( θ | y , ξ ) on the basis of new observations of data y | ξ .

More specifically, the Bayesian posterior has pdf

p ( θ | y , ξ ) = p ( y | θ , ξ ) π ( θ ) ∫ T p ( y | θ ' , ξ ) π ( θ ' ) d θ ' ,

where the denominator is referred to as the marginal likelihood p ( y | ξ ) = ∫ T p ( y | θ , ξ ) π ( θ ) d θ .

The values of the parameters θ that best describe the data are unknown a priori . In the well-specified case, there exists a θ ∗ ∈ T such that the data y arise from the model, i.e., p ( y | θ ∗ , ξ ) accurately characterises the probability of encountering y at design ξ . The experimenter's goal is to learn θ ∗ .

Model misspecification is the event that the assumed statistical model is dissimilar from the true DGP - in which case there exists no θ ∗ ∈ T for which p ( y | θ ∗ , ξ ) corresponds to the true DGP. In the presence of possible misspecification, different values of θ may be more or less useful for the experimenter. Gibbs inference (presented in Section 2.4) provides a way to specify context-dependent criteria for useful parameter values. The two forms of misspecification covered in this work are: outliers being present in the data-stream and incorrect noise distributional assumptions. The existence of outliers is common in many real-world environments, often due to poor data collection practices and faulty equipment. In constructing a statistical model, one may also make poor assumptions about the noise inherent in the data-stream.

## 2.3 Bayesian Optimal Experimental Design

Presuming the model is well-specified, the experimenter's goal is to select designs ξ whose corresponding outcomes y provide as much information as possible about the value θ ∗ . BOED (Rainforth et al., 2024; Huan et al., 2024) is a principled framework for conducting experiments in a way that maximises a utility function. This utility function is typically the (Bayesian) expected information gain (EIG; Lindley, 1956), an information-theoretic measure of how much one can expect to learn about Θ from an experiment conducted using a certain design ξ from the design space X . The definition of the EIG in Definition 2 requires a definition of the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence (Kullback and Leibler, 1951), which measures the difference between two probability distributions.

Definition 1 (KL divergence) . The KL divergence from a distribution P to a distribution Q is

KL( p ( x ) || q ( x )) := E p ( x ) [ log p ( x ) q ( x ) ] ,

where P and Q have pdfs p, q : X → R ≥ 0 , respectively. 1

Definition 2 (EIG) . The EIG is the expected KL divergence from the posterior to the prior

EIG( ξ ) = E p ( y | ξ ) [KL( p ( θ | y , ξ ) || π ( θ ))] . (1)

It can be verified that the EIG is equivalent to the mutual information between Θ and Y | ξ (Rainforth et al., 2024). By choosing the design ξ ∗ that maximises the EIG, the goal is to efficiently utilise our experimental resources to reduce uncertainty about Θ . Traditional BOED proceeds by performing a posterior update every time a new design-observation pair is obtained.

Notice how the experimenter relies on the statistical model p ( y | θ , ξ ) twice: once when computing the EIG, and again when computing the Bayesian posterior. This is known to be an effective procedure for updating beliefs about θ when the model is well-specified (Zellner, 1988; Paninski, 2005). However, when the model is misspecified, this affects BOED's effectiveness in both fitting data and gathering new data (Rainforth et al., 2024). The result can be wasted experimental resources and/or misleading inferences.

## 2.4 Gibbs Inference

Gibbs inference (Bissiri et al., 2016) generalises Bayesian updating by replacing the likelihood p ( y | θ , ξ ) with a loss function ℓ θ : T × X × Y → R which quantifies the 'agreement' (defined through the loss) between parameters of interest θ and data y | ξ .

The Gibbs posterior has pdf

π ( θ | y , ξ ) = exp( -ωℓ θ ( ξ , y )) π ( θ ) ∫ T exp( -ωℓ θ ' ( ξ , y )) π ( θ ' ) d θ ' , (2)

where π ( θ ) is the pdf of the prior distribution as in Bayesian inference, ω > 0 is a learning rate determining the influence of the data on the final posterior, and exp( -ωℓ θ ( ξ , y )) is known as the generalised likelihood . Assumption 1 below ensures that a Gibbs posterior exists so that conducting Gibbs inference is sensible (Bissiri et al., 2016; Knoblauch et al., 2022).

Assumption 1. The loss function ℓ θ ( ξ , y ) satisfies

0 < ∫ T exp( -ωℓ θ ( ξ , y )) π ( θ ) d θ < ∞ .

The generalised likelihood enables the loss function to provide information about the data, determining which parameter values are given higher weight in the Gibbs posterior update. When a statistical model is available, one can recover Bayesian inference using ω = 1 and ℓ θ ( ξ , y ) = -log p ( y | θ , ξ ) . This would be optimal when the model is well-specified (Zellner, 1988). In instances of potential misspecification, specific types of loss functions have been explored that try to induce robustness to misspecified models (see Knoblauch et al. (2022) for a comprehensive list of loss functions).

While the loss function need not rely on a statistical model, in many cases, the model contains some valid information. For example, it may capture a general trend that is contaminated by outliers. In such cases, the experimenter likely wants their inferences to reflect the information contained in the model. Loss functions that depend on the statistical model can be referred to as scoring rules (Dawid and Musio, 2014; Giummolè et al., 2018). In this work, we consider scoring rules because they can capture relevant information from the model, while simultaneously enabling robust inference.

## 2.5 Scoring Rules

The scoring rules we investigate in our work are power likelihoods (Holmes and Walker, 2017; McLatchie et al., 2025) and score matching (Barp et al., 2019; Matsubara et al., 2023; Altamirano et al., 2023). See Appendix C for more detail about our scoring rules.

̸

Power Likelihoods Power likelihoods (Holmes and Walker, 2017; McLatchie et al., 2025) use the negative log-likelihood loss ℓ θ ( ξ , y ) = -log p ( y | θ , ξ ) . The learning rate ω = 1 determines how much one relies on the statistical model for the Gibbs posterior update.

Score Matching The score function corresponding to an outcome distribution is the gradient of the logarithm of the corresponding density wrt outcomes y . For an outcome distribution with density p , we write the corresponding score function, evaluated at a given design-observation pair ( ξ , y ) , as ∇ y log p ( ξ , y ) .

Score matching (Hyvärinen, 2005) is an inferential framework in which one selects parameter values that minimise the Fisher divergence between the score functions of the statistical model and true DGP. This is particularly useful when the statistical model contains intractable normalising constants that cannot be evaluated, as is common in many real-world problems; evaluating the score function of a model does not require computing such constants. Using p model and p data to refer, respectively, to the densities characterising the statistical model and true DGP, the score matching loss is (Altamirano et al., 2024)

ℓ θ ( ξ , y ) = ∥ r ( ∇ y log p model ( ξ , y ) -∇ y log p data ( ξ , y )) ∥ 2 2 ,

̸

where r : X × Y → R =0 is an optional weighting function that can lead to improved robustness (Altamirano et al., 2023, 2024).

Notice that the score matching loss requires the true DGP p data , which one does not have access to in practice. The dependence on p data can be avoided under certain regularity conditions through integration by parts (Liu et al., 2022; Altamirano et al., 2023, 2024), making score matching useful in practice. We leave the computable form of the score matching loss to Appendix C.2.

Weighted Score Matching Extending (unweighted) score matching, one can introduce a weighting function r to induce robustness in the computed loss. Altamirano et al. (2024) propose the inverse multi-quadric (IMQ) kernel ('bump function') as a way of dealing with outliers in data. The IMQ kernel function r IMQ : X × Y → R > 0 relies on a centring function γ : X → R , shrinking function c : X → R > 0 , and learning rate ω > 0 :

r IMQ ( ξ , y ) = ω ( 1 + ( y -γ ( ξ )) 2 c ( ξ ) 2 ) -1 2 . (3)

ω is the largest possible weight that can be assigned by the kernel, γ controls the position of the bump ( y values far from γ are downweighted), and c determines how quickly observations are downweighted. The effectiveness of r IMQ depends on the choice of γ and c . Laplante et al. (2025) suggest to use the posterior predictive mean and variance for γ and c 2 respectively.

## 3 Generalised Bayesian Optimal Experimental Design

Our proposed framework, Generalised Bayesian Optimal Experimental Design (GBOED), is an extension of BOED to the generalised Bayesian inference setting. In traditional BOED, we seek to select designs ξ ∗ that maximise the Bayesian EIG (BEIG). In GBOED, we use generalised Bayesian inference to update beliefs about our parameters of interest, and so the amount of 'information gained' is a function of the Gibbs posterior. Here, we introduce the Gibbs EIG , a measure of the expected information gained within the Gibbs inference framework. Definition 8 shows that, analogously to the BEIG, our definition of the Gibbs EIG can be interpreted as the KL divergence from the Gibbs posterior to the prior. Theorem 1 shows that computation of the Gibbs EIG avoids the need for expensive posterior computations for the utility.

Throughout, we assume access to a (possibly) misspecified model p ( y | θ , ξ ) as in traditional Bayesian inference. This is used in Theorem 1 to compute the Gibbs EIG tractably, and in our chosen scoring rules as the model we want to make robust inferences over.

## 3.1 Additional Notation

Section 2.3 introduced the KL divergence to quantify the amount of expected information gained in the Bayesian framework. Our aim is to construct an analogous measure for Gibbs inference. However, the notion of the expected information gained requires reasoning about an expectation wrt a distribution of outcomes. In Bayesian inference, the expected outcome distribution is characterised by the marginal and conditional outcome distributions, p ( y | ξ ) and p ( y | θ , ξ ) , both derived from the likelihood. In Gibbs inference, the absence of a likelihood precludes access to an expected outcome distribution, making the BEIG in Section 2.3 inapplicable. Therefore, in order to reason about the information one expects to gain under the Gibbs framework, we require, in addition to the generalised inference framework, a generalised information-theoretic framework.

Let the denominator of Equation (2) be called the marginal generalised likelihood ˜ π ( y | ξ ) . Throughout, we use tildes to denote quantities characterising entities we refer to as pseudo-random variables (pseudo-rvs) that imply a stochastic sampling process.

Definition 3 (Pseudo-rv) . A pseudo-rv is a function ˜ Z : Z → R on a finite measure space ( Z , Σ , ˜ Π ) , where, for an event ζ ∈ Σ and pseudo-pdf ˜ π : Z → R ≥ 0 ,

˜ Π( ζ ) = ∫ z ∈ ζ ˜ π ( z ) d z .

We now introduce notation specific to Gibbs inference, where we use loss functions that may not respect the properties of pdfs. The pseudo-rv ˜ Y | ξ (the generalised Bayesian counterpart to Y | ξ ) satisfies Definition 3 and is characterised by a loss function-based pseudo-pdf. Although one does not require pseudo-rvs in conducting inference on real-world data, they are employed to formulate the Gibbs EIG as in Section 3.3. Again, this is because the marginal and conditional distributions of outcomes are absent in Gibbs inference, and so we formalise the stochasticity in the realisation of outcomes as pseudo-rvs.

Definition 4 below generalises the notion of an expectation to marginalise across the stochasticity implied by a pseudo-rv.

Definition 4 (Pseudo-expectation ˜ E ) . The pseudo-expectation ˜ E ˜ π ( x ) [ f ( x )] of a function f : X → R wrt a pseudo-pdf ˜ π : X → R ≥ 0 is

˜ E ˜ π ( x ) [ f ( x )] := ∫ X f ( x ) ˜ π ( x ) d x .

Notice that in the special case ˜ π is a standard pdf, Definition 4 is the expectation of f wrt the distribution characterised by ˜ π .

## 3.2 Measures of Gibbs information

Our first challenge is to define 'information-theoretic-like' measures of unexpectedness and divergence within Gibbs inference. These measures enable the construction of utility functions based on loss functions, which can be evaluated without costly normalising constants (see Appendix B).

Definition 5 (Pseudo-KL divergence) . The pseudo-KL divergence ˜ KL( ˜ π ( x ) || f ( x )) from a pseudopdf ˜ π : X → R ≥ 0 to a function f : X → R ≥ 0 is

˜ KL( ˜ π ( x ) || f ( x )) := ˜ E ˜ π ( x ) [ log ˜ π ( x ) f ( x ) ] .

Definition 6 is used to define the pseudo-mutual information (Definition 7), which will enable an analogue to the EIG under the Gibbs inference setting.

Definition 6 (Pseudo-joint density) . The pseudo-joint density implied by a pseudo-pdf ˜ π : Y → R ≥ 0 is

˜ π ( x , y ) := π ( x | y ) × ˜ π ( y ) ,

where π ( x | y ) is a pdf of an rv X that takes values x and which may depend on y .

Definition 7 (Pseudo-mutual information) . Take an rv X with pdf π ( x ) and a pseudo-rv ˜ Y with pseudo-pdf ˜ π ( y ) . The pseudo-mutual information is written as

˜ I ( X ; ˜ Y ) := ˜ KL( ˜ π ( x , y ) || π ( x ) ˜ π ( y )) .

## 3.3 Gibbs Expected Information Gain

We define the Gibbs EIG as the pseudo-mutual information between Θ and ˜ Y | ξ . In so doing, we both remain consistent with information-theoretic design selection, and generalise the BEIG to Gibbs posteriors, in the sense that we recover the BEIG under the negative log-likelihood loss and ω = 1 .

Definition 8 (Gibbs EIG) . The Gibbs EIG is the pseudo-mutual information between Θ and ˜ Y | ξ

EIG Gibbs ( ξ ) = ˜ I ( Θ ; ˜ Y | ξ ) (4)

= ˜ E π ( θ , y | ξ ) [ log ( π ( θ , y | ξ ) π ( θ ) ˜ π ( y | ξ ) )] , (5)

where π ( θ , y | ξ ) = π ( θ | y , ξ ) ˜ π ( y | ξ ) .

Analogously to the Shannon mutual information, the pseudo-mutual information between Θ and ˜ Y | ξ is equivalent to a pseudo-expectation of the KL divergence from the Gibbs posterior to the prior wrt ˜ π ( y | ξ ) . See more in Appendix A.1. The pseudo-mutual information between Θ and ˜ Y | ξ is also both non-negative and symmetric, the proof of which we defer to Appendix A.4.

Computability of the Gibbs EIG A great challenge with directly using Definition 8 is that we are likely unable to sample from π ( θ | y , ξ ) ˜ π ( y | ξ ) . It would be much more convenient and practical to sample directly from a statistical model. To do this, we can express the Gibbs EIG as an expectation wrt the outcome distribution implied by the statistical model. This enables the use of importance sampling in its estimation, as in Theorem 1 below.

Theorem 1. The Gibbs EIG can be expressed as

EIG Gibbs ( ξ ) = E π ( θ ) p ( y | θ , ξ ) [ ( -ωℓ θ ( ξ , y ) -log ˜ π ( y | ξ )) · ( exp( -ωℓ θ ( ξ , y )) p ( y | θ , ξ ) )] . (6)

The proof is in Appendix A.3. Theorem 1 suggests that, like the BEIG (Rainforth et al., 2018), the Gibbs EIG can be estimated using a nested Monte Carlo (NMC) estimator.

Definition 9 (Gibbs EIG NMC estimator) . The Gibbs EIG estimator is

U Gibbs NMC ( ξ ) ≜ N ∑ i =1     -ωℓ θ i ( ξ , y i ) -log   1 M M ∑ j =1 exp ( -ωℓ θ ij ( ξ , y i ) )     · Z θ i ( ξ , y i )   , (7)

where

Z θ i ( ξ , y i ) = ( exp( -ωℓ θ i ( ξ , y i )) p ( y i | θ i , ξ ) ) / ( c 1 c 2 ) ,

c 1 c 2 is a suitable weight described in Appendix B.2, and

θ i , y i ∼ π ( θ ) p ( y | θ , ξ ) , θ ij ∼ π ( θ ) .

Equation (7), like standard NMC estimators of the BEIG, has computational cost O ( NM ) (Rainforth et al., 2018; Foster et al., 2019). In many cases, numerical instability occurs as a result of taking the exponential over very large or small loss values. The generalised likelihood exp( -ωℓ θ ( ξ , y )) is generally also not a pdf, and would therefore normally need to be normalised. By suitable specification of the importance ratio Z , which is computed as in self-normalised importance sampling (Elvira and Martino, 2021), we bypass these issues. As a result, computing Equation (7) does not require the constant that arises from computationally expensive normalisation of exp( -ωℓ θ ( ξ , y )) . Details are left for Appendix B.

## 3.4 Exponential Decay for IMQ Parameters

Recall from Section 2.5 the weighted score matching loss function, which uses an IMQ kernel to downweight the influence of observations the kernel determines more likely to be outliers (Altamirano et al., 2024). To tune the IMQ kernel's parameters and affect its determination that a given observation is an outlier, Laplante et al. (2025) proposed to specify the centring function γ and shrinking function c on the basis of the posterior predictive mean and standard deviation, respectively.

In large-data regimes, the posterior standard deviation (the precision of one's posterior estimate) is often closely connected to the bias in the posterior mean (the accuracy of one's posterior estimate). However, in the small-data regimes that motivate the use of experimental design methods, the precision and accuracy of the posterior estimate may be quite different. The posterior variance typically becomes smaller after each update (precision increases), and so the posterior predictive variance (which recall controls how quickly we downweight observations) too becomes smaller. In the situation where the chosen prior places low probability on the data-generating value of θ , precision increases more quickly than accuracy: More posterior updates would be needed to identify the data-generating value of θ than to substantially decrease posterior variance. In initial experiments, our predictive mean would be a poor estimator of the centre of the data. If c decreases too quickly, we place more confidence in a predictive mean that is not a reliable estimator.

One way of tackling this is to choose c according to a different adaptive method, without relying on the posterior predictive distribution for reasons already described. We select c using exponential decay: We initialise c at a pre-specified value, and decrease it over the course of experimentation according to a pre-determined schedule. More specifically, our exponential decay method computes c according to

c ( i ) = q 1 exp( -b ( i -1)) + q 2

for experiment i ∈ { 1 , . . . , T } . b > 0 is a rate parameter to be chosen, and q 1 , q 2 > 0 are parameters controlling the starting and ending values (assuming convergence) of c during experimentation ( q 1 + q 2 is the value of c for the first experiment). Small values of b allow for small decreases in c per experiment, while large b values cause c to decay and thus converge to q 2 quickly (see Figure 5 in Appendix G.2). q 1 and q 2 reflect the distance between one's prior and the true posterior.

Assuming a fixed value of b , higher values of q 1 affect how large the value of c is at the beginning of experimentation. The value q 2 determines the lower bound to which c approaches as the experiment progresses. When q 2 is small, observations are more likely to be treated as outliers - i.e., the loss function focuses more on robustness in the later stages of experimentation. The exponential decay method presented is design independent, although one could introduce additional criteria for setting the hyperparameters that depend on the design.

One could instead use another decay method for selecting c , such as linear decay. We advise selecting a decay method that ensures that c does not fall in value too quickly, but not too slowly either in order to allow for robust inference.

## 4 Related Work

Several approaches have been proposed to tackle model misspecification in BOED. Many fall under the M -closed setting, where the true model is assumed to exist amongst a known set of possible models. BOED could be applied to the problem of selecting the model that best explains the data within this set (Cavagnaro et al., 2010; Hainy et al., 2022). In a similar avenue, one could manipulate the utility function to enable robustness to an entire set of models, by taking an expectation over data generated under this set of models (Catanach and Das, 2023). Another approach is to take an expectation of the utility function under a single alternative model, which, for example, is thought to better capture the true DGP (Overstall and McGree, 2022). Finally, one could use an alternative acquisition function to select designs that enhance robustness to model misspecification (Forster et al., 2025; Tang et al., 2025). GBOED not only enables robustness in design, but also in inference through generalised Bayesian inference.

The idea of using Gibbs inference to perform experimental design was first proposed by Overstall et al. (2023). However, their framework requires that an alternative model, coined the designer distribution , is made available. This distribution is assumed to be flexible and close to the true DGP, and allows one to compute the expected utility using draws from this distribution. The problem with this version of conducting experimental design is that the assumption usually fails: we are often not able to choose a model that we know is certainly close to the true DGP. Our approach avoids making this assumption, using Gibbs inference (informed by a - possibly misspecified - statistical model) to induce robustness into the experimental design procedure. Here, we are open to the possibility that, while misspecified, the statistical model has information relevant to an experimenter, and is our best understanding of how reality operates. This enables the use of loss functions that can directly take the statistical model into account when conducting Gibbs inference, in particular, through scoring rules (Dawid and Musio, 2014; Giummolè et al., 2018). In addition, we compute the expected utility in an information-theoretic fashion using Gibbs measures, rather than straightforwardly taking an expectation wrt the statistical model (as one would do following Overstall et al. (2023); see Appendix B.3 for a comparison between our approach and Overstall et al. (2023)).

Our approach also departs from that of Overstall et al. (2023) in that Overstall et al. (2023) make a normal approximation of the Gibbs posterior - utilising this approximation both in performing inference and in computing the expected utility. Although there are a number of scenarios under which normal approximations in the misspecified setting are viable (see Bochkina (2023) for a review), they generally require access to a large enough dataset for the approximation to be valid. The requirement of a large dataset is usually not satisfied in the experimental design setting.

## 5 Experiments

We empirically compare GBOED to the standard BOED approach across three experimental design problems of varying difficulty. In the linear regression setting, the learner assumes a linear model with Gaussian errors and selects covariates to estimate coefficients. In the pharmacokinetics setting, the learner uses a pharmacokinetic (PK) model (Ryan et al., 2014) to study drug concentration over time, choosing administration times for a small patient cohort to learn model parameters. The location finding setting presents a high-dimensional challenge: the task is to infer the positions of two objects in a d -dimensional space from signal intensities observed at selected points (stronger signals occur nearer the objects). We further test robustness under two misspecified scenarios: Asymmetric Outliers (outlier-contaminated data) and Misspecified Error Variance (incorrect noise

Figure 2: Methods compared under the asymmetric outlier scenario on three experimental design problems (columns); mean MMD (line) during experimentation and standard error (SE) shaded. Insets are zoomed in versions of the plots. Top row displays the outlier scenario using different loss functions. Bottom row displays the outlier scenario for GBOED but with alternative acquisition functions.

picture-2.png

model). Rather than using normal approximations of the posterior as in Overstall et al. (2023), we opt for (generalised) variational inference (Knoblauch et al., 2022). Here, one specifies a variational family and approximates the posterior with the member of the variational family that most closely resembles it. Experimental details of this, alongside other details, appear in Appendix E. Details of selecting the learning rate ω are deferred to Appendix D.

We provide results of our proposed GBOED framework (Gibbs EIG + Gibbs inference) under various loss functions, helping understand the benefits of each loss. We also perform ablation studies to understand the effect of using the novel Gibbs EIG for design selection: we additionally compare GBOED to the use of Gibbs inference combined with alternative acquisition functions. In the tables/figures, Random and BEIG denote, respectively, random and BEIG-based design selection combined with Gibbs inference under the specified loss. The comparisons here isolate the impact of each of the inference method, acquisition function, and loss function, clarifying which factors drive performance.

The performance of each method is evaluated using the root mean square error (RMSE), maximum mean discrepancy (MMD) (Gretton et al., 2012), and (negative) log-likelihood (NLL) between values sampled from the predictive distribution and those from the true DGP (see Appendix F for more details). We also provide qualitative accounts of performance, such as that in Figure 1.

Summary of Results In the well-specified case, GBOED is comparable to BOED and still offers relatively strong inferences. This is helpful in the (unlikely) circumstance that the model is wellspecified. Since GBOED is motivated and designed specifically for misspecified settings, we here focus on misspecification. We defer further discussion on the well-specified setting to Appendix G.1.

The results in Figure 2, Table 1, and Appendix G.1 show that GBOED using scoring rules with well-chosen hyperparameters leads to enhanced predictive performance compared to BOED. Overall, GBOED is more capable than BOED at tackling misspecification. Our ablation study suggests that the performance of GBOED can be attributed to the Gibbs EIG, in addition to Gibbs inference, in at least two of the experimental design problems. In particular, weighted score matching - where

Table 1: Mean ( ± SE) MMD/NLL over 100 runs for d -dimensional location-finding (well- and misspecified); best in bold. Full results in Appendix G.5. GBOED uses the Laplante et al. (2025) method for selecting the parameters in r IMQ for the weighted score matching loss function. 2 Acquisition + Gibbs Loss.

| Method                      | d = 2                       | d = 2                       | d = 4                       | d = 4                       | d = 8                       | d = 8                       |
|-----------------------------|-----------------------------|-----------------------------|-----------------------------|-----------------------------|-----------------------------|-----------------------------|
|                             | MMD                         | NLL                         | MMD                         | NLL                         | MMD                         | NLL                         |
| Well-Specified              | Well-Specified              | Well-Specified              | Well-Specified              | Well-Specified              | Well-Specified              | Well-Specified              |
| BOED                        | 0 . 367 (0 . 013)           | 3 . 075 (0 . 095)           | 0 . 083 (0 . 003)           | 1 . 011 (0 . 011)           | 0 . 007 (0 . 000)           | 0 . 745 (0 . 001)           |
| GBOED                       | 0 . 185 (0 . 004)           | 1 . 333 (0 . 018)           | 0.037 (0.001)               | 0.835 (0.002)               | 0.005 (0.000)               | 0.740 (0.000)               |
| Random + Laplante 2         | 0.156 (0.002)               | 1.199 (0.009)               | 0.037 (0.001)               | 0.835 (0.002)               | 0.005 (0.000)               | 0.740 (0.000)               |
| BEIG + Laplante 2           | 0 . 188 (0 . 005)           | 1 . 350 (0 . 021)           | 0.037 (0.000)               | 0.835 (0.002)               | 0.005 (0.000)               | 0.740 (0.000)               |
| Asymmetric Outliers         | Asymmetric Outliers         | Asymmetric Outliers         | Asymmetric Outliers         | Asymmetric Outliers         | Asymmetric Outliers         | Asymmetric Outliers         |
| BOED                        | 0 . 571 (0 . 017)           | 4 . 393 (0 . 122)           | 0 . 285 (0 . 005)           | 1 . 777 (0 . 020)           | 0 . 078 (0 . 002)           | 0 . 959 (0 . 006)           |
| GBOED                       | 0 . 179 (0 . 004)           | 1 . 300 (0 . 017)           | 0.036 (0.001)               | 0 . 834 (0 . 002)           | 0.005 (0.000)               | 0.739 (0.000)               |
| Random + Laplante 2         | 0.157 (0.002)               | 1.196 (0.009)               | 0 . 037 (0 . 001)           | 0 . 834 (0 . 002)           | 0.005 (0.000)               | 0 . 740 (0 . 000)           |
| BEIG + Laplante 2           | 0 . 187 (0 . 004)           | 1 . 334 (0 . 019)           | 0.036 (0.001)               | 0.831 (0.002)               | 0.005 (0.000)               | 0.739 (0.000)               |
| Misspecified Error Variance | Misspecified Error Variance | Misspecified Error Variance | Misspecified Error Variance | Misspecified Error Variance | Misspecified Error Variance | Misspecified Error Variance |
| BOED                        | 0 . 298 (0 . 006)           | 5 . 635 (0 . 150)           | 0 . 185 (0 . 005)           | 3 . 827 (0 . 130)           | 0 . 153 (0 . 006)           | 3 . 472 (0 . 126)           |
| GBOED                       | 0 . 150 (0 . 003)           | 2 . 851 (0 . 075)           | 0 . 144 (0 . 005)           | 3 . 201 (0 . 108)           | 0.150 (0.006)               | 3.430 (0.123)               |
| Random + Laplante 2         | 0 . 151 (0 . 003)           | 2 . 890 (0 . 080)           | 0 . 145 (0 . 005)           | 3 . 231 (0 . 109)           | 0.150 (0.006)               | 3.430 (0.123)               |
| BEIG + Laplante 2           | 0.147 (0.004)               | 2.816 (0.075)               | 0.142 (0.005)               | 3.178 (0.107)               | 0.150 (0.006)               | 3.430 (0.123)               |

c is selected according to our exponential decay method or the method proposed by Laplante et al. (2025) - leads to the best performance. The results in Figure 2 for linear regression show that our proposed exponential decay method leads to more favourable performance than the Laplante et al. (2025) IMQ parameter tuning method because there are gradual decreases in c , rather than rapid ones. This is useful when the true posterior of the model's functional form is far from the initial prior. When the two are close, exponential decay remains competitive to the Laplante et al. (2025) method. Appendix G contains a comprehensive set of results and additional details.

Isolating the Effect of the Gibbs EIG In the presence of misspecification, the Gibbs EIG leads to better predictive performance than using the BEIG or Random in the linear regression and PK settings (see Figure 2). This may be a result of design selection and parameter inference complementing one another (BEIG uses Bayesian posteriors, and the Gibbs EIG uses Gibbs posteriors). It could also be that the Gibbs EIG queries designs that better deal with observation error. In the location finding setting, the resulting performance varies according to the choice of acquisition function as the dimensionality rises, but the Gibbs EIG performs better than the BEIG on average when d = 2 (see Table 1). In Appendix G.3.2, we provide results showing that performing Gibbs inference on a dataset acquired using BOED does not result in optimal predictive performance. In other words, using GBOED actively during experimentation, rather than BOED and then conducting Gibbs inference on the final dataset, can result in significantly improved performance.

Exploratory Behaviour of the Gibbs EIG Randomly querying designs (total exploration) can be a natural strategy in the absence of prior knowledge, and can perform better than the BEIG under misspecification (Sloman et al., 2022; Tang et al., 2025). We leave a qualitative comparison between Random and the Gibbs EIG on the location finding problem for Appendix G.5.3, in which we show that the explorative nature of the Gibbs EIG depends on the loss function. In general, the Gibbs EIG exhibits strong exploration capabilities, which can be improved by tuning the learning rate ω . In the linear regression setting, the BEIG favours designs at the extremes of the design space, whilst the Gibbs EIG tends to query further away from the extremes. See Appendix G.3.4 and Appendix G.4.3 for the Gibbs EIG over the design spaces in the linear regression and PK settings, respectively.

We can visualise how BOED and GBOED explore on the location finding problem through Figure 1, offering an alternative view on how 'good" the curated dataset is, instead of making judgements based on predictive performance metrics. We find that designs selected by BOED can cluster around the wrong region of the design space when outliers are present in the data stream (top right). However, GBOED has the ability to avoid this clustering by instead exploring more in regions where one may have faced an outlier. This exploratory behaviour in turn prevents the drop in predictive

performance exhibited by BOED. While the method of Laplante et al. (2025) may score well on our metrics, in contrast, the dataset obtained via exponential decay explores more of the design space (see Appendix G.5.3).

GBOED in Higher Dimensions GBOED is more powerful than BOED as the dimensionality d of the designs and parameters to be learnt rises. Table 1 contains the results from performing GBOED with the Laplante et al. (2025) method, which we found offers the strongest predictive performance. This interestingly occurs both in well-specified and misspecified settings.

However, our ablation study shows that the difference in performance may be due to Gibbs inference rather than the Gibbs EIG: the Gibbs EIG does not always outperform other acquisition functions with Gibbs inference. The performance of GBOED improves when the learning rate is small (causing smaller deviations from the prior in the computed posterior), which can improve the performance of using the Gibbs EIG over alternatives (see Appendix G.5.2).

For tackling outliers, selecting designs at random appears to perform best in 2D location finding, perhaps as a result of the constrained design space. This does not continue as d increases. On the other hand, when the noise model is incorrect, using the BEIG performs better than the Gibbs EIG and Random, suggesting that heavy exploitation is favourable. Ivanova (2024) mention that variational inference, which we use to approximate posteriors, for location finding is quite far from being optimal, even more so through myopically maximising the EIG. Avoiding variational inference may improve the performance of GBOED, considering that this may be why BOED fails even in well-specified cases (as we see in Table 1).

## 6 Discussion

We introduced GBOED, a framework for performing sequential experimental design in the face of model misspecification. GBOED uses generalised Bayesian inference for improved parameter inference, and the Gibbs EIG to select an optimal sequence of designs for experimentation. Empirical results suggest that, consistent with prior literature, the BEIG leads to suboptimal performance in the presence of model misspecification. In these cases, the Gibbs EIG induces more exploration of the design space, usually leading to more robust design selections and inferences than the BEIG. With this framework, scientists can now both robustly select designs and conduct inference with a possibly misspecified model.

Our framework is not without its limitations, which could be addressed in future work. Firstly, our importance sampling regime in Theorem 1 can have repercussions if the statistical model is not a suitable proposal to compute the Gibbs EIG. This leads to issues with high variance and numerical instability. In this case, one may wish to use an alternative distribution that makes a better proposal. Score matching and many other scoring rules are closely related to the statistical model, reducing the possibility of encountering such issues. Secondly, we could use a better approximation method for computing the Gibbs EIG, knowing that the NMC estimator has a slow convergence rate and can instead be replaced by variational estimators (Foster et al., 2019). Thirdly, GBOED relies on a well-chosen learning rate; we still lack a method suitable for the experimental design setting to select this. Lastly, our framework is not so easily scalable to complicated and high-dimensional experimental design problems, as explained in the context of the location finding problem. Recent advances in amortisation and learning policies (Foster et al., 2021; Blau et al., 2022) can aid in selecting designs non-myopically, with few works investigating (prior and/or model) misspecification and generalisability in amortised experimental design settings (Ivanova et al., 2024; Barlas and Salako, 2025; Tang et al., 2025).

## Acknowledgements

The authors thank Ayush Bharti, François-Xavier Briol, Timothy Waite, and Zachris Björkman for helpful comments and feedback on early versions of this work. YZB was supported by a departmental studentship at The University of Manchester. SJS and SK were supported by the UKRI Turing AI World-Leading Researcher Fellowship [EP/W002973/1]. All experimental results were gathered through the Computational Shared Facility at The University of Manchester.

## References

| Altamirano, M., Briol, F.-X., and Knoblauch, J. (2023). Robust and scalable Bayesian online changepoint detection. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 642-663. PMLR.                                                                     |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Altamirano, M., Briol, F.-X., and Knoblauch, J. (2024). Robust and conjugate Gaussian process regression. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 1155-1185. PMLR.                                                                            |
| Atkinson, A. and Donev, A. (1992). Optimum Experimental Designs . Oxford Statistical Science Series. Clarendon Press.                                                                                                                                         |
| Barlas, Y. Z. and Salako, K. (2025). Performance comparisons of reinforcement learning algorithms for sequential experimental design. AAAI 2025 Workshop on Generalization in Planning (GenPlan) .                                                            |
| Barp, A., Briol, F.-X., Duncan, A., Girolami, M., and Mackey, L. (2019). Minimum stein discrepancy estimators. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 32.                                                                                        |
| Berk, R. H. (1966). Limiting behavior of posterior distributions when the model is incorrect. The Annals of Mathematical Statistics , 37.                                                                                                                     |
| Bingham, E., Chen, J. P., Jankowiak, M., Obermeyer, F., Pradhan, N., Karaletsos, T., Singh, R., Szer- lip, P., Horsfall, P., and Goodman, N. D. (2018). Pyro: Deep Universal Probabilistic Programming. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 20(1):973-978. |
| Bissiri, P. G., Holmes, C. C., and Walker, S. G. (2016). A general framework for updating be- lief distributions. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series B: Statistical Methodology ,                                                                |
| Blau, T., Bonilla, E. V., Chades, I., and Dezfouli, A. (2022). Optimizing sequential experimental design with deep reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 2107-2128. PMLR.                                           |
| Bochkina, N. (2023). Bernstein-von mises theorem and misspecified models: A review. Foundations of modern statistics , pages 355-380.                                                                                                                         |
| Busetto, A. G., Hauser, A., Krummenacher, G., Sunnåker, M., Dimopoulos, S., Ong, C. S., Stelling, J., and Buhmann, J. M. (2013). Near-optimal experimental design for model selection in systems biology. Bioinformatics , 29(20):2625-2632.                  |
| Catanach, T. A. and Das, N. (2023). Metrics for bayesian optimal experiment design under model misspecification. In 2023 62nd IEEE Conference on Decision and Control (CDC) , pages 7707- 7714. IEEE.                                                         |
| Cavagnaro, D. R., Myung, J. I., Pitt, M. A., and Kujala, J. V. (2010). Adaptive design optimization: A mutual information-based approach to model discrimination in cognitive science. Neural Computation , 22(4):887-905.                                    |
| Dawid, A. P. and Musio, M. (2014). Theory and applications of proper scoring rules. Metron , 72(2):169-183.                                                                                                                                                   |
| Elvira, V. and Martino, L. (2021). Advances in Importance Sampling , pages 1-14. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                                                                                                                                                      |
| Forster, A. J., Ivanova, D. R., and Rainforth, T. (2025). Improving robustness to model misspecifica- tion in bayesian experimental design. Workshop at the 7th Symposium on Advances in Approximate Bayesian Inference .                                     |
| Foster, A., Ivanova, D. R., Malik, I., and Rainforth, T. (2021). Deep adaptive design: Amortizing sequential bayesian experimental design. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 3384-3395. PMLR.                                           |
| Foster, A., Jankowiak, M., Bingham, E., Horsfall, P., Teh, Y. W., Rainforth, T., and Goodman, N. (2019). Variational bayesian optimal experimental design. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 32.                                            |

|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Garreau, D., Jitkrittum, W., and Kanagawa, M. (2017). Large sample analysis of the median heuristic.                                                                                                                                                |
| Gelman, A., Carlin, J., Stern, H., Dunson, D., Vehtari, A., and Rubin, D. (2013). Bayesian Data Analysis, Third Edition . Chapman & Hall/CRC Texts in Statistical Science. Taylor & Francis.                                                        |
| Giummolè, F., Mameli, V., Ruli, E., and Ventura, L. (2018). Objective bayesian inference with proper scoring rules. TEST , 28(3):728-755.                                                                                                           |
| Gretton, A., Borgwardt, K. M., Rasch, M. J., Schölkopf, B., and Smola, A. (2012). A kernel two-sample test. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 13(25):723-773.                                                                                  |
| Hainy, M., Price, D. J., Restif, O., and Drovandi, C. (2022). Optimal bayesian design for model discrimination via classification. Statistics and Computing , 32(2).                                                                                |
| Holmes, C. C. and Walker, S. G. (2017). Assigning a value to a power likelihood in a general bayesian model. Biometrika , 104(2):497-503.                                                                                                           |
| Huan, X., Jagalur, J., and Marzouk, Y. (2024). Optimal experimental design: Formulations and computations. Acta Numerica , 33:715-840.                                                                                                              |
| Hyvärinen, A. (2005). Estimation of non-normalized statistical models by score matching. J. Mach.                                                                                                                                                   |
| Hyvönen, N., Jääskeläinen, A., Maity, R., and Vavilov, A. (2024). Bayesian experimental design for head imaging by electrical impedance tomography. SIAM Journal on Applied Mathematics 84(4):1718-1741.                                            |
| Ibrahim, J. G. and Chen, M.-H. (2000). Power prior distributions for regression models. Statistical Science , 15(1):46-60.                                                                                                                          |
| Ivanova, D. R. (2024). Automated Data Acquisition via Bayesian Experimental Design . PhD thesis, University of Oxford.                                                                                                                              |
| Ivanova, D. R., Foster, A., Kleinegesse, S., Gutmann, M. U., and Rainforth, T. (2021). Implicit deep adaptive design: Policy-based experimental design without likelihoods. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 34:25785-25798.     |
| Ivanova, D. R., Hedman, M., Guan, C., and Rainforth, T. (2024). Step-DAD: Semi-Amortized Policy-Based Bayesian Experimental Design. ICLR 2024 Workshop on Data-centric Machine Learning Research (DMLR) .                                           |
| Karimi, A., Taghizadeh, L., and Heitzinger, C. (2021). Optimal bayesian experimental design for electrical impedance tomography in medical imaging. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering , 373:113489.                             |
| Kingma, D. P. and Ba, J. (2014). Adam: A method for stochastic optimization.                                                                                                                                                                        |
| Electronic Journal of Statistics , 6. Kleinegesse, S. and Gutmann, M. U. (2020). Bayesian experimental design for implicit models by mutual information neural estimation. In International conference on machine learning , pages 5316-5326. PMLR. |
| Knoblauch, J., Jewson, J., and Damoulas, T. (2022). An optimization-centric view on bayes' rule: Reviewing and generalizing variational inference. Journal of Machine Learning Research 23(132):1-109.                                              |
| Kullback, S. and Leibler, R. A. (1951). On information and sufficiency. The Annals of Mathematical Statistics , 22(1):79-86.                                                                                                                        |

| Laplante, W., Altamirano, M., Duncan, A., Knoblauch, J., and Briol, F.-X. (2025). Robust and conjugate spatio-temporal gaussian processes.                                                                       |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Lim, V., Novoseller, E., Ichnowski, J., Huang, H., and Goldberg, K. (2022). Policy-based bayesian experimental design for non-differentiable implicit models.                                                    |
| Lindley, D. (1956). On a measure of the information provided by an experiment. Annals of Mathematical Statistics , 27:986-1005.                                                                                  |
| Liu, S., Kanamori, T., and Williams, D. J. (2022). Estimating density models with truncation boundaries using score matching. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 23(186):1-38.                               |
| Martin, R. and Syring, N. (2022). Direct gibbs posterior inference on risk minimizers: Construction, concentration, and calibration. In Handbook of Statistics , volume 47, pages 1-41. Elsevier.                |
| Matsubara, T., Knoblauch, J., Briol, F.-X., and and, C. J. O. (2023). Generalized bayesian inference for discrete intractable likelihood. Journal of the American Statistical Association , 119(547):2345- 2355. |
| McLatchie, Y., Fong, E., Frazier, D. T., and Knoblauch, J. (2025). Predictive performance of power posteriors. Biometrika , page asaf034.                                                                        |
| Myung, J., Cavagnaro, D., and Pitt, M. (2013). A tutorial on adaptive design optimization. Journal of Mathematical Psychology , 57:53-67.                                                                        |
| Overstall, A. and McGree, J. (2022). Bayesian decision-theoretic design of experiments under an alternative model. Bayesian Analysis , 17(4):1021-1041.                                                          |
| Overstall, A. M., Holloway-Brown, J., and McGree, J. M. (2023). Gibbs optimal design of experi-                                                                                                                  |
| Paninski, L. (2005). Asymptotic theory of information-theoretic experimental design. Neural Computation , 17(7):1480-1507.                                                                                       |
| Paszke, A., Gross, S., Massa, F., Lerer, A., Bradbury, J., Chanan, G., Killeen, T., Lin, Z., Gimelshein, N., Antiga, L., et al. (2019). Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep learning library.    |
| Pauwels, E., Lajaunie, C., and Vert, J.-P. (2014). A bayesian active learning strategy for sequential BMC Systems Biology                                                                                        |
| experimental design in systems biology. , 8(1). Rainforth, T., Cornish, R., Yang, H., Warrington, A., and Wood, F. (2018). On nesting monte carlo                                                                |
| Rainforth, T., Foster, A., Ivanova, D. R., and Bickford Smith, F. (2024). Modern bayesian experimen- tal design. Statistical Science , 39(1):100-114.                                                            |
| Ryan, E. G., Drovandi, C. C., McGree, J. M., and Pettitt, A. N. (2016). A review of modern computational algorithms for bayesian optimal design. International Statistical Review , 84(1):128-                   |
| Sloman, S. J., Oppenheimer, D. M., Broomell, S. B., and Shalizi, C. R. (2022). Characterizing the robustness of bayesian adaptive experimental designs to active learning bias.                                  |
| Sutton, R. S. and Barto, A. G. (2018). Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction . The MIT Press, second edition.                                                                                                  |

Tang, R., Sloman, S. J., and Kaski, S. (2025). Generalization analysis for bayesian optimal experiment design under model misspecification.

Valentin, S., Kleinegesse, S., Bramley, N. R., Gutmann, M. U., and Lucas, C. G. (2021). Bayesian optimal experimental design for simulator models of cognition. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.15632 .

Vincent, B. T. and Rainforth, T. (2017). The darc toolbox: automated, flexible, and efficient delayed and risky choice experiments using bayesian adaptive design. PsyArXiv. October , 20.

Walker, S. G. (2013). Bayesian inference with misspecified models. Journal of Statistical Planning and Inference , 143(10):1621-1633.

Wu, P.-S. and Martin, R. (2023). A comparison of learning rate selection methods in generalized bayesian inference. Bayesian Analysis , 18(1).

Zellner, A. (1988). Optimal information processing and bayes's theorem. The American Statistician , 42(4):278-280.

Zhang, J., Bi, S., and Zhang, G. (2021). A scalable gradient free method for bayesian experimental design with implicit models. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics , pages 3745-3753. PMLR.

## A Gibbs Expected Information Gain Proofs and Properties

In this appendix, we detail certain proofs for results either mentioned in the main paper, or that would be helpful to derive other proofs. The properties of the Gibbs EIG are also covered in full.

For convenience, π ( θ , y | ξ ) = π ( θ | y , ξ ) ˜ π ( y | ξ ) .

## A.1 Proposition 1 - Pseudo-Expectation of the KL Divergence From the Posterior to the Prior

We mentioned in the main paper that the pseudo-mutual information between Θ and ˜ Y | ξ is equivalent to the pseudo-expected KL divergence from the Gibbs posterior to the prior. Proposition 1 proves that this is true, enabling an alternative interpretation of the Gibbs EIG in terms of KL divergences.

Proposition 1. The Gibbs EIG is equivalent to the pseudo-expectation of the KL divergence from the Gibbs posterior to the prior with respect to ˜ π ( y | ξ )

EIG Gibbs ( ξ ) = ˜ E ˜ π ( y | ξ ) [KL( π ( θ | y , ξ ) || π ( θ ))] . (8)

Proof. Starting from Equation (8) and the pseudo-expectation definition in Definition 4,

EIG Gibbs ( ξ ) = ˜ E ˜ π ( y | ξ ) [KL( π ( θ | y , ξ ) || π ( θ ))] = ∫ Y (∫ T log ( π ( θ | y , ξ ) π ( θ ) ) π ( θ | y , ξ ) d θ ) ˜ π ( y | ξ ) d y = ∫ Y ∫ T log ( π ( θ | y , ξ ) π ( θ ) ) π ( θ | y , ξ ) ˜ π ( y | ξ ) d θ d y = ∫ Y ∫ T log ( π ( θ | y , ξ ) ˜ π ( y | ξ ) π ( θ ) ˜ π ( y | ξ ) ) π ( θ | y , ξ ) ˜ π ( y | ξ ) d θ d y = ˜ E π ( θ | y , ξ ) ˜ π ( y | ξ ) [ log ( π ( θ | y , ξ ) ˜ π ( y | ξ ) π ( θ ) ˜ π ( y | ξ ) )] = ˜ E π ( θ , y | ξ ) [ log ( π ( θ , y | ξ ) π ( θ ) ˜ π ( y | ξ ) )] ,

which is the Gibbs EIG as in Definition 8.

picture-3.png

## A.2 Lemma 1 - Gibbs EIG in Terms of Loss Functions

Lemma 1 offers an important interpretation of the Gibbs EIG in terms of loss functions, rather than directly using posteriors. This is equivalent to the BEIG being expressed in terms of likelihood functions. The idea is that this is often a cheaper and more convenient way to compute the Gibbs EIG, knowing that posteriors are usually expensive to compute. This is because posteriors do not always have closed-forms, as is often the case in both Bayesian and Gibbs inference.

Lemma 1. The Gibbs EIG is the difference between the negative loss -ωℓ θ ( ξ , y ) and the log marginal generalised likelihood log ˜ π ( y | ξ ) in pseudo-expectation with respect to π ( θ ) exp ( -ωℓ θ ( ξ , y ))

EIG Gibbs ( ξ ) = ˜ E π ( θ ) exp( -ωℓ θ ( ξ , y )) [ -ωℓ θ ( ξ , y ) -log ˜ π ( y | ξ )] . (9)

Proof. Using Proposition 1, we can write the EIG in terms of loss functions knowing that

π ( θ ) exp ( -ωℓ θ ( ξ , y )) = π ( θ | y , ξ ) ˜ π ( y | ξ ) . (10)

We take a pseudo-expectation over the marginal generalised likelihood ˜ π ( y | ξ ) of the information gain, resulting in our Gibbs EIG measure (the pseudo-mutual information between Θ and ˜ Y | ξ ). This makes the Gibbs EIG equivalent to the BEIG under the negative log-likelihood loss, where in the Bayesian setting we take an expectation over the marginal likelihood. We also remain within the Gibbs inference framework, enabling the use of Equation (10) for rewriting the Gibbs EIG in various forms, such as what we derive here. Theorem 1 explains how, despite the fact that the Gibbs EIG is defined in terms of pseudo-rvs which cannot be directly sampled from, we can tractably compute the Gibbs EIG using a misspecified statistical model.

By using Proposition 1 and the definition of a pseudo-expectation as in Definition 4, we have

EIG Gibbs ( ξ ) = ˜ E ˜ π ( y | ξ ) [KL( π ( θ | y , ξ ) || π ( θ ))] = ∫ Y (∫ T log ( π ( θ | y , ξ ) π ( θ ) ) π ( θ | y , ξ ) d θ ) ˜ π ( y | ξ ) d y = ∫ Y ∫ T log ( π ( θ | y , ξ ) π ( θ ) ) π ( θ | y , ξ ) ˜ π ( y | ξ ) d θ d y = ∫ Y ∫ T log ( π ( θ ) exp ( -ωℓ θ ( ξ , y )) π ( θ ) ˜ π ( y | ξ ) ) π ( θ | y , ξ ) ˜ π ( y | ξ ) d θ d y = ∫ Y ∫ T ( -ωℓ θ ( ξ , y ) -log ˜ π ( y | ξ )) π ( θ | y , ξ ) ˜ π ( y | ξ ) d θ d y = ∫ Y ∫ T ( -ωℓ θ ( ξ , y ) -log ˜ π ( y | ξ )) π ( θ ) exp ( -ωℓ θ ( ξ , y )) d θ d y = E π ( θ ) exp( -ωℓ ( ξ , y )) [ -ωℓ θ ( ξ , y ) -log π ( y | ξ )] ,

˜ θ ˜

which is exactly the form in Equation (9).

## A.3 Theorem 1 - Computing the Gibbs EIG with Importance Sampling

Perhaps the most important element of this work is moving from pseudo-rvs to standard rvs for computing and interpreting the Gibbs EIG. This notably enables the use of many standard statistical and computational practices for computing the EIG (Foster et al., 2019). For example, we can use NMCas explained in Appendix B.

Theorem 1. The Gibbs EIG can be expressed as

EIG Gibbs ( ξ ) = E π ( θ ) p ( y | θ , ξ ) [ ( -ωℓ θ ( ξ , y ) -log ˜ π ( y | ξ )) · ( exp( -ωℓ θ ( ξ , y )) p ( y | θ , ξ ) )] .

Proof. Starting from Lemma 1, we have

EIG Gibbs ( ξ ) = ˜ E π ( θ ) exp( -ωℓ θ ( ξ , y )) [ -ωℓ θ ( ξ , y ) -log ˜ π ( y | ξ )] = ∫ T ∫ Y ( -ωℓ θ ( ξ , y ) -log ˜ π ( y | ξ )) π ( θ ) exp ( -ωℓ θ ( ξ , y )) d y d θ .

We can then use importance sampling to sample from π ( θ ) p ( y | θ , ξ ) , meaning we no longer need pseudo-rvs,

= ∫ ∫ ( -ωℓ θ ( ξ , y ) -log ˜ π ( y | ξ )) π ( θ ) exp ( -ωℓ θ ( ξ , y )) d y d θ

T Y = ∫ T ∫ Y ( -ωℓ θ ( ξ , y ) -log ˜ π ( y | ξ )) ( π ( θ ) exp ( -ωℓ θ ( ξ , y )) π ( θ ) p ( y | θ , ξ ) ) π ( θ ) p ( y | θ , ξ ) d y d θ = E π ( θ ) p ( y | θ , ξ ) [ ( -ωℓ θ ( ξ , y ) -log ˜ π ( y | ξ )) · ( exp( -ωℓ θ ( ξ , y )) p ( y | θ , ξ ) )] ,

which is now an expectation over the statistical model and exactly Equation (6).

## A.4 Properties of the Gibbs EIG

We determine whether the Gibbs EIG satisfies the non-negativity and symmetric properties that the standard mutual information has. We start by repeating the pseudo-mutual information between Θ and ˜ Y | ξ in the Gibbs inference setting.

Relation to Mutual Information The Gibbs EIG can equivalently have the following form, matching the pseudo-mutual information between Θ and ˜ Y | ξ through Gibbs inference

˜ I ( Θ ; ˜ Y | ξ ) = ˜ E π ( θ , y | ξ ) [ log ( π ( θ , y | ξ ) π ( θ ) ˜ π ( y | ξ ) )] .

Non-Negativity We can rewrite the information gain as a KL divergence between the posterior and the prior as shown in Proposition 1, which is non-negative. It follows that as the KL divergence is non-negative, so too is the Gibbs EIG.

Symmetry We need to show that the pseudo-mutual information between Θ and ˜ Y | ξ is the same as the pseudo-mutual information between ˜ Y | ξ and Θ . In other words, that

˜ I ( π ( θ | y , ξ ) ˜ π ( y | ξ ); π ( θ ) ˜ π ( y | ξ )) = ˜ I ( π ( θ ) exp ( -ωℓ θ ( ξ , y )) ; ˜ π ( y | ξ ) π ( θ )) .

Since π ( θ ) exp ( -ωℓ θ ( ξ , y )) = π ( θ | y , ξ ) ˜ π ( y | ξ ) , the symmetric property holds.

## A.5 Interpreting the Gibbs Expected Information Gain

The Gibbs EIG depends heavily on the choice of loss function and learning rate. In this subsection, we discuss how the Gibbs EIG varies depending on the choice of c in r IMQ , or Equation (3), for the weighted score matching loss. A comparison of how the learning rate ω affects the Gibbs EIG is reserved for Figure 4 in Appendix D.

We will first discuss how to interpret the Gibbs EIG. From Proposition 1, the Gibbs EIG is equivalent to the (pseudo-)expected KL divergence from the posterior to the prior, analogously to the BEIG. Ultimately, this means that the two would normally be equivalent if the posterior were the same in both the Gibbs EIG and BEIG - though this is generally never the case because of how we compute posteriors. The differently computed posterior causes the Gibbs EIG to be a transformation of the BEIG, controlled by the choice of learning rate and loss function. In the context of dealing with misspecification, rather than seeking informative designs according to a Bayesian posterior, now one seeks informative designs according to Gibbs posteriors - allowing parameter inference and design selection to complement one another. We offer a comprehensive set of results in Appendix G focusing on how different learning rates and loss functions affect design selection and inference.

Figure 3 displays the effect of changing c on the Gibbs EIG under the weighted score matching loss, with ω = 1 . A 'poor" prior refers to simply using a unit Gaussian as a prior, which generally places very low probability on the true parameter values (at least in the well-specified case). A 'good" prior refers to a prior much closer to what the true posterior should be, having lower variance as a result. The EIG surfaces generally have similar qualitative shapes regardless of whether the prior is close to the true posterior or not.

The unweighted score matching loss and weighted score matching loss when c = 10 both exhibit behaviour similar to the BEIG, querying the extremes of the design space. As c →∞ , the fraction in r IMQ converges to zero, resulting in r IMQ producing the same weight for all observations. This explains the closeness of unweighted score matching and c = 10 . Smaller values of c appear to cause falls in the information gain one can expect to receive, and indicate an interest in querying slightly away from the extremes with a poor prior. When using a good prior, querying at the extremes seems to be preferred slightly more. Tuning c appears to behave similarly to tuning ω , at least in the linear regression setting (see Appendix D).

picture-4.png

Figure 3: Comparison of different downweighting rates c on the Gibbs EIG under different priors, for the Bayesian linear regression problem. Left: poor prior (unit Gaussian, larger posterior variance). Right: good prior (close to the true posterior, smaller posterior variance). Smaller c values tend to cause queries slightly away from the extremes, with more noise compared to the other curves. Large c values have EIG curves close to the unweighted score matching loss.

picture-5.png

Since unweighted score matching and the negative log-likelihood are related, the behaviour in Figure 3 meets expectations - values of c that do not excessively downweight observations too quickly (i.e., large values of c ) would cause the Gibbs EIG to have the same parabolic form as the BEIG, and values of c that seek to downweight observations much more deviate from the BEIG. This deviation from the BEIG results in other regions of the design space having a greater chance of being queried during experimentation (see c = 0 . 5 in Figure 3). Combining changes in c together with lower learning rates ω can additionally result in more diverse optimal designs.

## B Gibbs Expected Information Gain Estimation

Many of the estimators for the BEIG (Foster et al., 2019) can be naturally generalised to methods for approximating the Gibbs EIG. This appendix explains our Gibbs EIG NMC estimator.

## B.1 Nested Monte Carlo Estimator

The NMC estimator for the BEIG is well-studied in BOED (Rainforth et al., 2018). It is a simple approach to approximating the EIG which provides a naïve NMC approximation to the marginal likelihood.

Following Theorem 1, we arrive at our NMC estimator knowing that

˜ π ( y | ξ ) = E π ( θ ) [exp( -ωℓ θ ( ξ , y ))]

can be approximated by, for sufficiently large M samples from π ( θ ) ,

˜ π ( y | ξ ) ≈ 1 M M ∑ j =1 exp ( -ωℓ θ j ( ξ , y ) ) .

The NMC estimator then easily follows by substitution

U Gibbs NMC ( ξ ) ≜ N ∑ i =1     -ωℓ θ i ( ξ , y i ) -log   1 M M ∑ j =1 exp ( -ωℓ θ ij ( ξ , y i ) )     · Z θ i ( ξ , y i )   ,

where

Z θ i ( ξ , y i ) = ( exp( -ωℓ θ i ( ξ , y i )) p ( y i | θ i , ξ ) ) / ( c 1 c 2 ) ,

c 1 c 2 is a suitable weight described in Appendix B.2, and

θ i , y i ∼ π ( θ ) p ( y | θ , ξ ) , θ ij ∼ π ( θ ) .

## B.2 Normalising the Importance Weight

We mentioned briefly that we use self-normalised importance sampling (Elvira and Martino, 2021). Moving beyond standard importance sampling, the importance ratio is made to sum to one. In more detail, we first normalise the numerator of exp( -ωℓ θ ( ξ , y )) p ( y | θ , ξ ) , optionally the denominator, and finally the resulting numerator and denominator normalised fraction overall. The first of these tackles the numerical stability problem of working with exponentials. Normalising the denominator/likelihood is optional since it is both already a pdf in y and whether or not it is normalised does not change the final value of the importance ratio. Since we require the importance ratio to be normalised, it is a given that we finally normalise this after normalising its numerator.

Starting by normalising exp( -ωℓ θ ( ξ , y )) , and then the resulting fraction, we have the importance ratio

Z θ i ( ξ , y i ) = 1 c 2 1 c 1 exp( -ωℓ θ i ( ξ , y i )) p ( y i | θ i , ξ ) = 1 c 1 c 2 exp( -ωℓ θ i ( ξ , y i )) p ( y i | θ i , ξ ) = 1 ∑ N i =1 exp( -ωℓ θ i ( ξ , y i )) p ( y i | θ i , ξ ) exp( -ωℓ θ i ( ξ , y i )) p ( y i | θ i , ξ ) (11)

where c 1 ≡ ∑ N j =1 exp( -ωℓ θ i ( ξ , y j )) , c 2 ≡ ∑ N j =1 1 c 1 exp( -ωℓ θ i ( ξ , y j )) p ( y j | θ i , ξ ) and Equation (11) follows since

c 2 = N ∑ i =1 1 c 1 exp( -ωℓ θ i ( ξ , y j )) p ( y j | θ i , ξ ) = 1 c 1 N ∑ i =1 exp( -ωℓ θ i ( ξ , y j )) p ( y j | θ i , ξ )

.

We should demonstrate that we can recover the BEIG using ω = 1 and ℓ θ ( ξ , y ) = -log p ( y | θ , ξ ) . We have that

Z θ i ( ξ , y i ) = 1 ∑ N i =1 exp( -ωℓ θ i ( ξ , y j )) p ( y j | θ i , ξ ) exp( -ωℓ θ i ( ξ , y i )) p ( y i | θ i , ξ ) = 1 ∑ N i =1 p ( y j | θ i , ξ ) p ( y j | θ i , ξ ) p ( y i | θ i , ξ ) p ( y i | θ i , ξ ) = 1 N .

The same result is recovered regardless of whether or not one normalises the numerator or denominator first, but the point of normalising these is to protect against numerical instability and to accurately estimate the Gibbs EIG.

Putting this back into the Gibbs EIG NMC estimator,

U NMC ( ξ ) ≜ N ∑ i =1     -ωℓ θ i ( ξ , y i ) -log   1 M M ∑ j =1 exp ( -ωℓ θ ij ( ξ , y i ) )     · Z θ i ( ξ , y i )   = N ∑ i =1     log p ( y i | θ i , ξ ) -log   1 M M ∑ j =1 p ( y i | θ ij , ξ )     · 1 N   = 1 N N ∑ i =1     log p ( y i | θ i , ξ ) -log   1 M M ∑ j =1 p ( y i | θ ij , ξ )       .

Here, we recover the BEIG NMC estimator from Rainforth et al. (2018) since Z becomes the constant 1 N .

## B.3 Importance of the Importance Weight

One could instead consider computing the following

U ( ξ ) ≜ 1 N N ∑ i =1     -ωℓ θ i ( ξ , y i ) -log   1 M M ∑ j =1 exp ( -ωℓ θ ij ( ξ , y i ) )       ,

where

θ i , y i ∼ π ( θ ) p ( y | θ , ξ ) , θ ij ∼ π ( θ ) ,

i.e., the Gibbs EIG in Theorem 1 without the importance weight.

This is equivalent to the setting by Overstall et al. (2023), where we directly use their Equation (4) for computing the Gibbs expected utility. The connection to our setting exists when the designer distribution (which they specify as D ) is our (misspecified) statistical model, and the outer-expectation of the utility with respect to a quantity (which they specify as C ) is the prior distribution (the prior is the quantity). The utility is then the log-ratio between the posterior and prior. In other words, the expected utility is the following (non-pseudo) expectation

EIG( ξ ) = E π ( θ ) p ( y | θ , ξ ) [log π ( θ | y , ξ ) -log π ( θ )] = E π ( θ ) p ( y | θ , ξ ) [ -ωℓ θ ( ξ , y ) -log ˜ π ( y | ξ )] .

It is easy to see that, like our proposed Gibbs EIG, this is equivalent to the BEIG for ω = 1 and ℓ θ ( ξ , y ) = -log p ( y | θ , ξ ) . However, this is not in general equivalent to the Gibbs EIG presented in Definition 8. The lack of the importance weight means that we cannot rearrange to recover any of Definition 8, Proposition 1, and Lemma 1 - in other words, we do not make use of pseudo-expectations.

As a result, a different expectation gets computed, rather than that provided by the Gibbs EIG. This therefore gives a different interpretation of the EIG, where one computes the same function but using samples solely from the statistical model. Without the importance weight, the generalised likelihood exp( -ωℓ θ ( ξ , y )) has no say in how the samples from the statistical model contribute to the log-ratio we estimate. Consequently, we deviate from the intuition laid out behind developing the Gibbs EIG.

We can show empirically what the consequences of not using the importance weight in the Gibbs EIG are. Below in Table 2 are the results from performing regression as in Appendix E.5, using weighted score matching with exponential decay ( b = 0 . 04) . The same loss function and other related parameters are used for a fair comparison. Evidence suggests that using the importance weight as in Theorem 1 provides better performance, additionally suggesting that naïvely using directly the Overstall et al. (2023) method of computing the Gibbs expected utility is not optimal.

## C Scoring Rules

The loss functions, or scoring rules, that we use have been detailed in full in this appendix.

Table 2: Comparison of using an importance weight as in Theorem 1, or avoiding it as following Overstall et al. (2023). RMSE, MMD, and NLL are recorded with mean (and standard error) over 3 different models, each replicated under 30 random seeds (3 × 30 = 90 replications in total ) . Top: Well-specified setting. Middle: Observations corrupted with asymmetric outliers. Bottom: True error distribution is Laplacian.

| Rate                 | RMSE                | MMD                 | NLL                 |
|----------------------|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|
| Well-Specified       | Well-Specified      | Well-Specified      | Well-Specified      |
| Importance Weight    | 1.6024 (0.0402)     | 0.0768 (0.0079)     | 1.6288 (0.0371)     |
| No Importance Weight | 1 . 6437 (0 . 0428) | 0 . 0965 (0 . 0099) | 1 . 6954 (0 . 0434) |
| Asymmetric Outliers  | Asymmetric Outliers | Asymmetric Outliers | Asymmetric Outliers |
| Importance Weight    | 2.4716 (0.1016)     | 0.4803 (0.0314)     | 3.4828 (0.2064)     |
| No Importance Weight | 2 . 4991 (0 . 0998) | 0 . 4886 (0 . 0312) | 3 . 5836 (0 . 2010) |
| Laplacian Errors     | Laplacian Errors    | Laplacian Errors    | Laplacian Errors    |
| Importance Weight    | 1.9652 (0.0487)     | 0.1125 (0.0115)     | 2.2494 (0.0534)     |
| No Importance Weight | 1 . 9878 (0 . 0499) | 0 . 1227 (0 . 0118) | 2 . 2883 (0 . 059)  |

## C.1 Power Likelihoods

̸

Put simply, power likelihoods (also called power priors or power posteriors, depending on the context) (Ibrahim and Chen, 2000; Bissiri et al., 2016; Holmes and Walker, 2017; McLatchie et al., 2025) are exactly the negative log-likelihood loss, except that the learning rate ω = 1 (avoiding the recovery of Bayesian inference). ω is used to determine how much one relies on the statistical model for the Gibbs posterior update. As always, for ω < 1 the update places more weight on the prior, and ω > 1 gives the data more weight, which is usually not done in misspecified settings.

̸

The power likelihood is simply the use of the negative log-likelihood loss function along with a calibration weight ω = 1 ,

ℓ θ ( ξ , y ) = -log p ( y | θ , ξ ) .

Putting this into the GBOED framework, the Gibbs posterior is

π ( θ | y , ξ ) = exp( ω log p ( y | θ , ξ )) · π ( θ ) ˜ π ( y | ξ ) = p ( y | θ , ξ ) ω · π ( θ ) ˜ π ( y | ξ ) .

The Gibbs EIG is then simply (by Theorem 1)

EIG Gibbs ( ξ ) = E π ( θ ) p ( y | θ , ξ ) [ ( ω log p ( y | θ , ξ ) -log ˜ π ( y | ξ )) · ( exp(log p ( y | θ , ξ ) ω ) p ( y | θ , ξ ) )] = E π ( θ ) p ( y | θ , ξ ) [ (log p ( y | θ , ξ ) ω -log ˜ π ( y | ξ )) · ( p ( y | θ , ξ ) ω p ( y | θ , ξ ) )] ,

which would recover the BEIG at ω = 1 .

## C.2 Score Matching

The score function corresponding to an outcome distribution is the gradient of the logarithm of the corresponding density with respect to outcomes y . For an outcome distribution with density p , we write the corresponding score function as ∇ y log p .

Score matching (Hyvärinen, 2005) is an inferential framework in which one selects parameter values that minimise the Fisher divergence between the score functions of the statistical model and true DGP. This is particularly useful when the statistical model contains intractable normalising constants that cannot be evaluated, as is common in many real-world problems; evaluating the score function of a model does not require computing such constants. Using p model and p data to refer, respectively, to

the densities characterising the statistical model and true DGP, the score matching loss is (Altamirano et al., 2024)

D ( p data || p model ) = E y ∼ p data [ ∥ r ( ∇ y log p model ( ξ , y ) -∇ y log p data ( ξ , y )) ∥ 2 2 ] ,

̸

where r : X × Y → R =0 is an optional weighting function that can lead to improved robustness (Altamirano et al., 2023, 2024). The score matching loss can additionally include an expectation over a design distribution (Altamirano et al. 2024, Equation (2)); in the experimental design setting, we instead select the design according to our utility.

Since the score matching loss function requires p data to be known, we desire a way to avoid needing to know this explicitly. Thankfully, under certain regularity conditions (Liu et al., 2022; Altamirano et al., 2023, 2024), we can use integration by parts to write the score matching loss function as

D ( p data || p model ) = E y ∼ p data [ ∥ r ( ∇ y log p model ( ξ , y ) -∇ y log p data ( ξ , y )) ∥ 2 2 ] = E y ∼ p data [ ( r ∇ y log p model ( ξ , y )) 2 +2 ∇ y ( r 2 ∇ y log p model ( ξ , y ) ) ] .

D ( p data || p model ) then translates to

ℓ θ ( ξ , y ) = ( r ∇ y log p ( y | θ , ξ )) 2 +2 ∇ y ( r 2 ∇ y log p ( y | θ , ξ ) ) .

The corresponding Gibbs posterior and Gibbs EIG then follow easily by substitution.

Aspecial property of the score matching loss function is that it admits conjugacy for statistical models in the exponential family (Altamirano et al., 2023). This results in closed-form (Gibbs) posteriors being made available, avoiding the need for expensive variational approximations. This can be taken advantage of in our GBOED framework.

## C.3 Weighted Score Matching

Altamirano et al. (2024) advocate for the inverse multi-quadric (IMQ) kernel ('bump function') as a way of dealing with outliers in data. For the purposes of our investigation, this is the weighting function r we consider. The IMQ kernel function r IMQ : X ×Y → R > 0 relies on a centring function γ : X → R , shrinking function c : X → R > 0 , and learning rate ω > 0 :

r IMQ ( ξ , y ) = ω ( 1 + ( y -γ ( ξ )) 2 c ( ξ ) 2 ) -1 2

.

ω is the largest possible weight that can be assigned by the kernel, i.e. is the value the kernel evaluates to when the inner fraction in the kernel returns a zero. γ controls the position of the bump; y values far from γ are downweighted. c determines how quickly observations are downweighted.

The effectiveness of the IMQ kernel in dealing with outliers in data heavily depends on the choice of γ and c . Altamirano et al. (2024) propose to use the prior mean at each design ξ as γ and a design independent value of c based on how many outliers one expects to see in the data. In practice, suitable specification of γ and c is challenging: One typically would not know how often they would see an outlier, nor the prior mean. Laplante et al. (2025) highlight the disadvantages of using the Altamirano et al. (2024) approach, and instead suggest to use the posterior predictive mean and standard deviation for γ and c respectively. This is adaptive and particularly allows one to tackle the challenge of determining how to set the centre of the data and how quickly to downweight observations at each point in time.

We then have

ℓ θ ( ξ , y ) = ( r IMQ ( ξ , y ) ∇ y log p ( y | θ , ξ )) 2 +2 ∇ y ( r IMQ ( ξ , y ) 2 ∇ y log p ( y | θ , ξ ) ) .

## D Learning Rate Selection

It is common in generalised Bayesian inference to set a fixed calibration weight, or learning rate , ω that determines how much one relies on the data in the posterior update (Knoblauch et al., 2022). Previously proposed approaches to selecting the learning rate depend on a dataset already

being available (Wu and Martin, 2023). Because of this, these approaches are not suitable for the experimental design setting which is concerned with how to gather these data in the first place.

We first discuss how the learning rate affects the Gibbs EIG. The NMC estimator tends to zero as the learning rate approaches zero, i.e., lim ω → 0 U Gibbs NMC ( ξ ) = 0 (knowing that exp(0) = 1 and log(1) = 0 ). This reflects the effect of the learning rate on the Gibbs posterior: A smaller learning rate results in the posterior being closer to the prior (and exactly the prior when ω = 0 ). Setting ω < 1 has the effect of downweighting the EIG. This effect makes intuitive sense, given that the BEIG itself is not actually a sensible estimate of information gain under misspecification. This results in the generalised Bayesian experimental design including areas of the design space that would normally never be queried by the BEIG, an attractive property that can help one examine the degree of misspecification in their model by querying the design space more widely. See Figure 4 for an example of how the learning rate affects the Gibbs EIG.

Figure 4: Comparison of different learning rates for computing the Gibbs EIG using the negative log-likelihood loss, under the Bayesian linear regression problem. Marked crosses are the 10 designs with the greatest (Gibbs) EIG for a particular curve. Bottom: The Gibbs EIG at ω = 0 . 1 . EIG values are lower than the other two curves, and designs slightly further away from the extremes have greater EIG. Middle: The Gibbs EIG at ω = 0 . 5 . Less smooth EIG curve than the curve above, with some indication of designs with greater EIG values being somewhat away from the extremes. Top: The BEIG ( ω = 1 ). Greatest EIG values are at the most extreme ends of the design space, and the EIG curve is much smoother than the other two.

picture-6.png

A learning rate too small results in slow learning for the (usually small) experimental budget given and, perhaps, overly downweighting the EIG. A learning rate too high can arguably make learning under misspecification too fast; it may be of interest to slowly deviate from our prior as we learn from incoming data that may not fit well with our assumed statistical model. A smaller learning rate also allows one to query downweighted informative designs, inducing robustness into the acquisition function.

We choose to set a fixed learning rate due to the weighted score matching method relying heavily on the choice of weighting function r , rather than on ω . Since robustness is introduced by r , the learning rate becomes an additional vexatious hyperparameter to set - though something reasonable still needs to be chosen. Altamirano et al. (2024) also explain that optimising both ω and c in r IMQ is numerically unstable due to near non-identifiability. Particularly in Gaussian process (GP) regression, Altamirano et al. (2024); Laplante et al. (2025) fix ω to a value depending on the Gaussian variance. This allows for the recovery of the standard GP as c →∞ in r IMQ . As we are not working in the GP regression setting, ω should be chosen according to the user's beliefs about the level of misspecification in their statistical model - significant misspecification results in less reliable inference. Although we could easily reuse the learning rate selection method by Altamirano et al. (2024); Laplante et al. (2025), we may not always be using Gaussian's or have a known variance in our model. As the variance exceeds σ 2 = 2 , the learning rate becomes ω > 1 , which is arguably not sensible under misspecification due to placing more weight on the data.

## E Experiment Details

## E.1 Source Code

A GitHub repository containing the code used to generate the results presented in this paper can be found at https://github.com/yasirbarlas/GBOED . The code is written in Python and relies heavily on Pyro (Bingham et al., 2018) and PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019). Our code is based on existing code from Foster et al. (2020), Ivanova et al. (2021), Blau et al. (2022), and Barlas and Salako (2025) where relevant.

## E.2 Hardware

All experiments were run through the Computational Shared Facility High-Performance Computer at The University of Manchester, using the Slurm Workload Manager. An AMD EPYC 9634 84-Core CPUwas used for the experiments. 8 CPU cores and 50GB of RAM were assigned to each experiment. No GPUs were used.

## E.3 Generalised Variational Inference

To allow for scalability to high-dimensional and complex experimental design problems, we utilise generalised variational inference (Knoblauch et al., 2022) to learn (Gibbs) posteriors. In particular, we seek to maximise the generalised evidence lower-bound (ELBO)

ELBO ≡ E q ϕ ( z ) [log (exp ( -ωℓ ψ, z ( y ))) + log p ψ ( z ) -log q ϕ ( z )] ≡ E q ϕ ( z ) [ -ωℓ ψ ( y ) + log p ψ ( z ) -log q ϕ ( z )] ,

for a prior p ψ ( z ) and guide q ϕ ( z ) with variational parameters ψ and ϕ respectively.

We used stochastic variational inference through Pyro (Bingham et al., 2018) with the ELBO objective above. We took 10000 steps with the Adam optimiser (Kingma and Ba, 2014), using a learning rate of 0.005. Both Bayesian and Gibbs inference make use of the same variational family and parameters.

## E.4 Scenarios of Misspecification

The form of misspecification we study is related to contamination and outliers rather than misspecification in the functional form of a statistical model. We detail the studied scenarios below.

Asymmetric outliers As similarly considered by Altamirano et al. (2024), for the Bayesian linear regression experimental design problem, each observation generated by the statistical model has a 30% chance of being contaminated by subtracting the observation by some z ∼ U (3 σ, 9 σ ) , where U is the uniform distribution and σ is the standard deviation assumed by the statistical model. For pharmacokinetics, as the standard deviation is not constant for each design, we subtract z ∼ U (3 , 7) . Chance of contamination is also 50% to account for the small experimental budget. For the location finding problem, z ∼ U (3 σ, 7 σ ) , and the chance of contamination is 30%.

Changes in error distribution The misspecified model may assume a certain distribution for the errors, such as a normal distribution. For the Bayesian linear regression experimental design problem, this scenario considers that the true errors actually come from a Laplace distribution with the same location and scale parameters, rather than a normal distribution. We modify the additive noise and multiplicative noise for the pharmacokinetics experimental design problem. In the location finding experimental design problem, we look at changes to the scale of the assumed distribution.

## E.5 Bayesian Linear Regression

We are interested in learning the relationship between covariates ξ and a dependent variable y . To do so, we assume a linear regression model and seek to learn K coefficients θ = ( β 0 , . . . , β K -1 ) . We restrict our covariates in ξ ∈ [ -4 , 4] . An experimenter conducts T = 10 experiments, meaning that we should learn θ by selecting designs according to our choice of utility function.

For each coefficient β i ∈ R , we use a standard normal prior given by

β i ∼ N (0 , 1) .

For a given design (matrix) ξ and known standard deviation σ , the likelihood function is given by, for a single dependent variable y i ,

y i | θ , ξ i ∼ N ( ξ ⊺ i θ , σ 2 ) .

We assess the performance of each method as an average over 3 different true models:

y i = 10 -7 ξ i , y i = -3 + 8 ξ i , y i = 9 + 9 ξ i ,

with standard deviations σ = 1 . 2 , σ = 0 . 8 , and σ = 1 respectively.

Under misspecification We explore the asymmetric outlier and change in error distribution scenarios for the Bayesian linear regression experimental design problem. Performance is averaged over the three different true models above (3 × 30 = 90 replications in total ) .

Computational details For computing the (Gibbs) EIG, we set N = 10000 , M = 100 in our NMC estimator. The design space [ -4 , 4] is discretised into 100 possible designs that an experimenter can select. The EIG is computed for each design, and the design with the greatest EIG is selected for the real experiment to be performed. ω = 1 unless stated otherwise. q 1 = 9 and q 2 = 1 when using our exponential decay method.

## E.6 Pharmacokinetics

Pharmacokinetics is concerned with finding optimal blood sampling times to accurately characterise drug concentration-time profiles whilst minimising any costs. This problem has been considered in many experimental design studies (Ryan et al., 2014; Kleinegesse and Gutmann, 2020; Zhang et al., 2021; Ivanova et al., 2021). A pharmacokinetics (PK) model built by Ryan et al. (2014) is used to simulate drug concentration at a particular time. The PK model is controlled by three parameters, θ = ( k α , k e , V ) , where V is the volume of distribution, k α is the absorption rate, and k e is the elimination rate. Our goal is to select a single blood sampling time ξ ∈ [0 , 24] once a drug has been administered to a patient, and this process of blood sampling is done sequentially for T = 5 unique patients, presenting a very small data scenario.

We set the following prior on θ , matching Ryan et al. (2014),

log θ ∼ N ([ log 1 log 0 . 1 log 20 ] , [ 0 . 05 0 0 0 0 . 05 0 0 0 0 . 05 ]) .

With the constraint k α > k e , the PK model is given by

z ( θ , ξ ) = D V V · k α k α -k e [exp( -k e ξ ) -exp( -k α ξ )] , y ( θ , ξ ) = z ( θ , ξ )(1 + ϵ ) + η,

where D V = 400 , ϵ ∼ N (0 , 0 . 01) is multiplicative noise, and η ∼ N (0 , 0 . 1) is additive noise. As both noise sources are normally distributed, the likelihood can otherwise be viewed as

y | θ , ξ ∼ N ( z ( θ , ξ ) , 0 . 01 z ( θ , ξ ) 2 +0 . 1) .

Following Kleinegesse and Gutmann (2020), the true parameters for the model are θ = ( k α , k e , V ) = (1 . 5 , 0 . 15 , 15) .

Under misspecification We investigate the asymmetric outlier scenario, where performance is averaged over a single true model (1 × 100 = 100 replications in total ) . We also investigate changes in the error distribution, where separately the additive noise is changed to η ∼ N (0 , 1 . 0) , and the multiplicative noise is to be ϵ ∼ N (0 , 0 . 15) . Performance is then averaged over these two different true models (2 × 50 = 100 replications in total ) .

Computational details For computing the (Gibbs) EIG, we set N = 10000 , M = 100 in our NMC estimator. We used Bayesian optimisation (suitable for continuous design spaces) on the Gibbs EIG NMC estimator to select the optimal design in the design space for each experiment. A Matérn52 kernel with lengthscale 20 and variance 10 was used alongside the GP-UCB1 algorithm (Srinivas

Table 3: Assumed location finding parameters. σ can differ in the real-world environment depending on the misspecification present.

| Parameter   |   Value |
|-------------|---------|
| K           |  2      |
| α           |  1      |
| b           |  0.1    |
| m           |  0.0001 |
| σ           |  0.5    |

et al., 2009), with a UCB exploration parameter value of λ = 6 . A total of 3000 function evaluations were made available of the EIG oracle (one optimal design out of 3000 randomly sampled designs within the design space is chosen for the real experiment). ω = 0 . 8 for the well-specified scenario and ω = 0 . 1 for the misspecified scenarios, unless stated otherwise. q 1 = 0 . 8 and q 2 = 0 . 2 when using our exponential decay method.

## E.7 Location Finding

Location finding is an experimental design problem that has been used to showcase the performance of various experimental design methods (Foster et al., 2021; Ivanova et al., 2021; Blau et al., 2022). There are K objects on a d -dimensional space, and in this experiment the task is to identify their locations θ = ( β 1 , . . . , β K ) based on the signals that the objects emit. We select designs ξ , which are the coordinates chosen to observe the signal intensity, in an effort to learn the locations of the objects. Our spaces are restricted in ξ ∈ [ -4 , 4] d to make the problem more tractable. An experimenter conducts T = 30 experiments, presenting a relatively large data scenario (compared to the other problems).

The total intensity at point ξ is the superposition of the individual intensities for each object,

µ ( θ , ξ ) = b + K ∑ i =1 α m + || β i -ξ || 2 ,

where α is a constant, b > 0 is a constant controlling the background signal, and m> 0 is a constant controlling the maximum signal. The total intensity is then used in the likelihood function calculation.

For an object β i ∈ R d , we use a standard normal prior given by

β i ∼ N d ( 0 , I ) ,

where 0 is the mean vector, and I is the covariance matrix, an identity matrix, both with dimension d .

The likelihood function is the logarithm of the total signal intensity µ ( θ , ξ ) with Gaussian noise σ . For a given design ξ , the likelihood function is given by

log y | θ , ξ ∼ N (log µ ( θ , ξ ) , σ 2 ) .

Our assumed hyperparameter choices are detailed in Table 3.

The true parameters for the model are θ = ( β 1 , β 2 ) , where

β 1 = (1 . 5 , -1 . 3 , 0 . 1 , -1 . 8 , -0 . 7 , -1 . 1 , 0 . 4 , 0 . 4 , -2 . 0 , -1 . 2 , -0 . 3 , 0 . 2 , 1 . 6 , -1 . 2 , 1 . 5 , 0 . 8) β 2 = ( -1 . 8 , 0 . 5 , 1 . 9 , -0 . 2 , -1 . 7 , 1 . 4 , -0 . 5 , 2 . 0 , -1 . 1 , 1 . 2 , 1 . 6 , -2 . 0 , -0 . 1 , 0 . 0 , -1 . 6 , -1 . 3) ,

and d = 16 . For 1 ≤ d < 16 , the first d dimensions from each β i are used in the model. For example, if d = 2 , θ = ( β 1 , β 2 ) = [(1 . 5 , -1 . 3) , ( -1 . 8 , 0 . 5)] .

Under misspecification We investigate the asymmetric outlier scenario, where performance is averaged over a single true model (1 × 100 = 100 replications in total ) . We also investigate changes in the error distribution, where σ is made equal to a range of different values in { 1 , 1 . 5 } . Performance is then averaged over these two different true models (2 × 50 = 100 replications in total ) .

Computational details For computing the (Gibbs) EIG, we set N = 10000 , M = 100 in our NMC estimator. We used Bayesian optimisation (suitable for continuous design spaces) on the Gibbs EIG NMC estimator to select the optimal design in the design space for each experiment. A Matérn52 kernel with lengthscale 15 and variance 4 was used alongside the GP-UCB1 algorithm (Srinivas et al., 2009), with a UCB exploration parameter value of λ = 12 . A total of 5000 function evaluations were made available of the EIG oracle. ω = 0 . 2 unless stated otherwise. q 1 = 9 and q 2 = 1 when using our exponential decay method.

## F Metrics

In this appendix we discuss our choice of metrics and how exactly they are computed.

For consistency, we sample N values from the posterior predictive distribution for each design. This means that we have N × D values in total for the total number of designs D . We also sample N values from the true (outlier-free) data-generating distribution, meaning N × D values in total. The same predictive distribution generated is used when required by the Laplante et al. (2025) and exponential decay methods, changing every posterior update.

N = 1000 in all experiments, D = 100 for the Bayesian linear regression experimental design problem, and D = 500 for the pharmacokinetics and location finding experimental design problems. The designs for both the pharmacokinetics and location finding problems are sampled randomly as part of the Bayesian optimisation procedure, but remain fixed each time the metrics are computed. This preserves fairness amongst all methods, since the same designs are used when computing the metrics.

Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) To compute the RMSE, for a single design, we take the difference between the posterior predictive samples and the samples from the true data-generating distribution. This returns N errors for each design. After taking this difference, we square it and take the mean over all N squared differences. We then take the square root to give us the RMSE for each design. We finally compute the mean RMSE over all designs. Mathematically, this is

RMSE = 1 D D ∑ d =1 √ √ √ √ 1 N N ∑ i =1 (ˆ y di -y di ) 2 ,

where ˆ y di are samples from the predictive distribution, and y di are samples from the true datagenerating process both for design d and predictive/true sample i .

Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD) To compute the MMD, we follow guidance by Gretton et al. (2012). For a single design, we have N samples from the posterior predictive, and N samples from the true data-generating distribution. So to compute the unbiased MMD , we average over all designs

̸

MMD= 1 D D ∑ d =1 [ 1 N ( N -1) ∑ i = j k (ˆ y di , ˆ y dj ) + 1 M ( M -1) ∑ i = j k ( y di , y dj ) -2 NM N ∑ i =1 M ∑ j =1 k (ˆ y di , y dj ) ] ,

̸

where k ( x , y ) is the radial basis function (RBF)

k ( x , y ) = exp ( -∥ x -y ∥ 2 2 2 σ 2 )

for bandwidth σ . Gretton et al. (2012) recommend using the median heuristic to compute σ , which is the (empirical) median distance between points in the aggregate sample of x and y . This is traditionally computed as σ = √ H n 2 , where H n = Median { ∥ XY n,i -XY n,j ∥ 2 2 ∣ ∣ 1 ≤ i < j ≤ n } for aggregate XY (Garreau et al., 2017).

Log-Likelihood Use the N × D samples from the true data-generating distribution and calculate the mean log-likelihood

Log-Likelihood = 1 D D ∑ d =1   1 N N ∑ i =1 log   1 M M ∑ j =1 p ( y i | θ j , ξ d )     ,

where y i are the samples from the true data-generating distribution and θ j are samples from the posterior. The likelihood used is that from the assumed statistical model.

## G Additional Experiments

## G.1 Complete Results for Linear Regression, Pharmacokinetics, and Well-Specified Settings

Table 4 contains the results for both the linear regression and pharmacokinetics experimental design problems. We find that the Gibbs EIG generally performs better than using the BEIG or a random acquisition method for choosing designs. GBOED overall performs better than BOED too, and exponential decay appears to offer the best performance in general.

GBOED in Well-Specified Scenarios In well-specified settings, there is no need to be robust. Bayesian inference is known to be the optimal way to proceed in performing parameter inference (Zellner, 1988), and BOED performs strongly on both the linear regression and pharmacokinetics problems. As pharmacokinetics only has T = 5 experiments, it is a lot more difficult for GBOED to provide performance much closer to BOED. This is likely because the loss functions chosen, in particular weighted score matching, are focused on robustness, and so they do not place much trust in the well-specified data - they also do not have enough data to realise that there are no outliers. However, BOED can either marginally or severely fall behind GBOED in all three experimental design problems under the well-specified setting (see Table 1 and Table 4). This could reflect slight inaccuracies in the posterior approximation, due to the use of variational inference or a lack of data being collected. If the issue was with variational inference (such as with the choice of variational family), an issue others have noted in the location finding setting (Ivanova, 2024), GBOED (specifically, Gibbs inference) appears to provide robustness against poor choices of variational family or other variational parameters. There is a good chance that, given enough data, BOED would eventually outperform GBOED for the linear regression and pharmacokinetics problems, after observing in Figure 6 and Figure 7 the continued rises in performance per experiment. But such a reliance on large enough data is problematic when the idea is to optimally acquire data using as little resources as possible; a small dataset with the same information as a much larger one is ideal. We finally mention the strength of GBOED over using alternative acquisition functions with Gibbs inference. The Gibbs EIG often offers superior performance in the well-specified setting over randomly selecting designs, and interestingly, over using the BEIG. This is particularly true for the linear regression and pharmacokinetics problems (see Table 4), where in pharmacokinetics the gap in performance can be very significant. In lower dimensions this seems to continue for the location finding problem too, but not necessarily as the dimensions increase (see Table 1).

## G.2 Effect of Rate Selection on the Exponential Decay Method

Arobust method for selecting c should enable enough time (i.e., be large enough) to learn the centring function γ in early experiments, and enable enough time to be robust to the acquired data (i.e., be small enough to discern between outliers). Finding the right balance is difficult, however, as we find throughout this paper, our exponential decay method is a competitive method for selecting c .

The effect of choosing a certain rate b in our exponential decay method on the final value of c in each experiment can be viewed in Figure 5. Here, experiments are in both the Bayesian linear regression and location finding settings with the parameters controlling the starting and ending values (assuming convergence) of c during experimentation q 1 = 9 and q 2 = 1 . No matter the rate chosen, c = 10 in the first experiment as a result. In the early experiments, the loss function is similar to the unweighted score matching loss. By setting b , we control how quickly the loss function deviates from unweighted score matching to provide additional robustness.

Clearly, smaller values of b result in smaller decreases of c per experiment. This can lead to spending more time learning a sensible estimate of the centring function γ , before more rapid decreases in c

Table 4: Mean ( ± SE) MMD/NLL over 90 (linear regression) or 100 (pharmacokinetics) runs under well- and misspecified models; best in bold. Full results in Appendix G.3 and Appendix G.4. Methods named, excluding BOED and Acquisition + Gibbs Loss, are GBOED with the loss function named. ω = 1 . 0 for the linear regression problem, ω = 0 . 8 for the pharmacokinetics problem under the well-specified setting, and ω = 0 . 1 for the pharmacokinetics problem under misspecified settings.

| Method                              | Well-Specified                      | Well-Specified                      | Asymmetric Outliers                 | Asymmetric Outliers                 | Laplacian / Misspec. Error Dist.    | Laplacian / Misspec. Error Dist.    |
|-------------------------------------|-------------------------------------|-------------------------------------|-------------------------------------|-------------------------------------|-------------------------------------|-------------------------------------|
|                                     | MMD                                 | NLL                                 | MMD                                 | NLL                                 | MMD                                 | NLL                                 |
| Linear Regression (90 Replications) | Linear Regression (90 Replications) | Linear Regression (90 Replications) | Linear Regression (90 Replications) | Linear Regression (90 Replications) | Linear Regression (90 Replications) | Linear Regression (90 Replications) |
| BOED                                | 0 . 134 (0 . 012)                   | 1 . 803 (0 . 050)                   | 0 . 548 (0 . 034)                   | 4 . 048 (0 . 328)                   | 0 . 162 (0 . 015)                   | 2 . 433 (0 . 078)                   |
| Power-Like ω = 0 . 8                | 0 . 189 (0 . 016)                   | 1 . 988 (0 . 067)                   | 0 . 571 (0 . 035)                   | 4 . 042 (0 . 278)                   | 0 . 177 (0 . 014)                   | 2 . 445 (0 . 065)                   |
| Unweighted-SM                       | 0 . 081 (0 . 008)                   | 1 . 642 (0 . 038)                   | 0 . 519 (0 . 030)                   | 3 . 662 (0 . 191)                   | 0.112 (0.011)                       | 2.249 (0.049)                       |
| Laplante et al. (2025)              | 0 . 938 (0 . 065)                   | 31 . 993 (2 . 388)                  | 1 . 030 (0 . 061)                   | 28 . 663 (2 . 109)                  | 0 . 935 (0 . 062)                   | 32 . 444 (2 . 441)                  |
| Exp-Decay b = 0 . 04                | 0.077 (0.008)                       | 1.629 (0.037)                       | 0.480 (0.031)                       | 3.483 (0.206)                       | 0.112 (0.012)                       | 2.249 (0.053)                       |
| Random + Exp-Decay                  | 0 . 107 (0 . 011)                   | 1 . 742 (0 . 053)                   | 0 . 573 (0 . 033)                   | 4 . 515 (0 . 341)                   | 0 . 140 (0 . 014)                   | 2 . 359 (0 . 069)                   |
| BEIG + Exp-Decay                    | 0 . 081 (0 . 009)                   | 1 . 645 (0 . 041)                   | 0 . 499 (0 . 035)                   | 3 . 928 (0 . 321)                   | 0 . 131 (0 . 017)                   | 2 . 424 (0 . 129)                   |
| Pharmacokinetics (100 Replications) | Pharmacokinetics (100 Replications) | Pharmacokinetics (100 Replications) | Pharmacokinetics (100 Replications) | Pharmacokinetics (100 Replications) | Pharmacokinetics (100 Replications) | Pharmacokinetics (100 Replications) |
| BOED                                | 0 . 122 (0 . 009)                   | 1 . 417 (0 . 033)                   | 0 . 916 (0 . 058)                   | 16 . 188 (1 . 643)                  | 0 . 251 (0 . 012)                   | 4 . 978 (0 . 298)                   |
| Power-Like                          | 0.116 (0.008)                       | 1.377 (0.025)                       | 0 . 858 (0 . 050)                   | 10 . 581 (1 . 288)                  | 0 . 232 (0 . 008)                   | 3 . 874 (0 . 110)                   |
| Unweighted-SM                       | 0 . 351 (0 . 010)                   | 2 . 903 (0 . 081)                   | 1 . 079 (0 . 068)                   | 22 . 839 (1 . 799)                  | 0 . 297 (0 . 021)                   | 5 . 351 (0 . 375)                   |
| Laplante et al. (2025)              | 0 . 208 (0 . 013)                   | 1 . 812 (0 . 063)                   | 0 . 441 (0 . 006)                   | 2 . 211 (0 . 017)                   | 0 . 223 (0 . 006)                   | 2 . 937 (0 . 036)                   |
| Exp-Decay b = 0 . 04                | 0 . 176 (0 . 014)                   | 1 . 741 (0 . 115)                   | 0.426 (0.006)                       | 2.169 (0.014)                       | 0.218 (0.007)                       | 2.911 (0.034)                       |
| Random + Exp-Decay                  | 0 . 329 (0 . 015)                   | 2 . 993 (0 . 128)                   | 0 . 440 (0 . 005)                   | 2 . 204 (0 . 015)                   | 0 . 271 (0 . 007)                   | 3 . 099 (0 . 044)                   |
| BEIG + Exp-Decay                    | 0 . 356 (0 . 021)                   | 2 . 703 (0 . 178)                   | 0 . 434 (0 . 005)                   | 2 . 190 (0 . 014)                   | 0 . 241 (0 . 006)                   | 3 . 002 (0 . 039)                   |

Figure 5: Comparison of different values of the rate b in the exponential decay method for selecting c in r IMQ . b = 0 . 04 results in the slowest decrease of c per experiment, whereas b = 0 . 12 results in the fastest decrease.

picture-7.png

Experiment

lead to substantially more robustness. A larger value of b , such as b = 0 . 12 , can lead to c becoming smaller faster, using fewer experiments to learn a good estimate of γ . A good balance needs to be made between learning γ in good enough time and in having c become small to allow for a robust model to be learnt.

## G.3 Bayesian Linear Regression

## G.3.1 Complete Results

The results presented in the main paper with all methods and metrics can be found in Table 5. All three metrics generally agree with each other. A figure containing performance during the entire experimental horizon is provided in Figure 6, with all three metrics, and for the well-specified, asymmetric outlier, and misspecified error distribution scenarios.

Table 5: Comparison of methods under both well-specified and misspecified scenarios in the regression problem, with ω = 1 if not stated. ( q 1 , q 2 ) = (9 , 1) and b = 0 . 04 for the exponential decay method. RMSE, MMD, and NLL are recorded with mean (and standard error) over 3 different models, each replicated under 30 random seeds (3 × 30 = 90 replications in total ) .

| Method                 | RMSE                | MMD                 | NLL                  |
|------------------------|---------------------|---------------------|----------------------|
| Well-Specified         | Well-Specified      | Well-Specified      | Well-Specified       |
| BOED                   | 1 . 7383 (0 . 0476) | 0 . 1340 (0 . 0119) | 1 . 8032 (0 . 0499)  |
| Power-Like ω = 0 . 8   | 1 . 8665 (0 . 0577) | 0 . 1889 (0 . 0157) | 1 . 9885 (0 . 0669)  |
| Unweighted-SM          | 1 . 6090 (0 . 0406) | 0 . 0807 (0 . 0083) | 1 . 6423 (0 . 0383)  |
| Laplante et al. (2025) | 6 . 9500 (0 . 4326) | 0 . 9378 (0 . 0652) | 31 . 9929 (2 . 3881) |
| Exp-Decay b = 0 . 04   | 1.6024 (0.0402)     | 0.0768 (0.0079)     | 1.6288 (0.0371)      |
| Random + Exp-Decay     | 1 . 6843 (0 . 0484) | 0 . 1068 (0 . 0114) | 1 . 7419 (0 . 0530)  |
| BEIG + Exp-Decay       | 1 . 6107 (0 . 0419) | 0 . 0810 (0 . 0093) | 1 . 6448 (0 . 0412)  |
| Asymmetric Outliers    | Asymmetric Outliers | Asymmetric Outliers | Asymmetric Outliers  |
| BOED                   | 2 . 6952 (0 . 1224) | 0 . 5479 (0 . 0341) | 4 . 0477 (0 . 3282)  |
| Power-Like ω = 0 . 8   | 2 . 7546 (0 . 1188) | 0 . 5705 (0 . 0348) | 4 . 0425 (0 . 2785)  |
| Unweighted-SM          | 2 . 5351 (0 . 0960) | 0 . 5185 (0 . 0301) | 3 . 6622 (0 . 1907)  |
| Laplante et al. (2025) | 6 . 8456 (0 . 3924) | 1 . 0299 (0 . 0611) | 28 . 6630 (2 . 1086) |
| Exp-Decay b = 0 . 04   | 2.4716 (0.1016)     | 0.4803 (0.0314)     | 3.4828 (0.2064)      |
| Random + Exp-Decay     | 2 . 7877 (0 . 1211) | 0 . 5732 (0 . 0329) | 4 . 5146 (0 . 3413)  |
| BEIG + Exp-Decay       | 2 . 5645 (0 . 1186) | 0 . 4990 (0 . 0346) | 3 . 9283 (0 . 3206)  |
| Laplacian Errors       | Laplacian Errors    | Laplacian Errors    | Laplacian Errors     |
| BOED                   | 2 . 0862 (0 . 0558) | 0 . 1615 (0 . 0153) | 2 . 4333 (0 . 0780)  |
| Power-Like ω = 0 . 8   | 2 . 1284 (0 . 0569) | 0 . 1774 (0 . 0141) | 2 . 4446 (0 . 0649)  |
| Unweighted-SM          | 1.9614 (0.0465)     | 0.1124 (0.0107)     | 2.2486 (0.0493)      |
| Laplante et al. (2025) | 7 . 1135 (0 . 4261) | 0 . 9350 (0 . 0619) | 32 . 4439 (2 . 4411) |
| Exp-Decay b = 0 . 04   | 1 . 9652 (0 . 0487) | 0 . 1125 (0 . 0115) | 2 . 2494 (0 . 0534)  |
| Random + Exp-Decay     | 2 . 0443 (0 . 0570) | 0 . 1398 (0 . 0138) | 2 . 3585 (0 . 0690)  |
| BEIG + Exp-Decay       | 2 . 0169 (0 . 0604) | 0 . 1309 (0 . 0172) | 2 . 4242 (0 . 1291)  |

## G.3.2 BEIG of Final Designs, and Inference on a Fixed Dataset

We investigate in terms of the BEIG how different the designs selected by each GBOED method are from standard BOED. To isolate the effect of Gibbs inference, we here additionally show the results of experiments in which a dataset is already made available and inference is conducted according to a certain method.

The BEIG column in Table 6 focuses on how much the designs chosen by each method differ from those selected by the BEIG. This is in terms of the design sequence's absolute difference in BEIG from that of performing a standard BOED regime. Larger values in the BEIG column indicate that the respective method selects designs that a BOED regime would not. The other columns in Table 6 present the RMSE, MMD, and NLL from solely performing Gibbs (or Bayesian for BOED) inference on a fixed dataset of designs and observations (i.e., no new data is collected and so a utility function serves no purpose). Each datapoint was processed sequentially to enable the use of sequential inference methods like that by Laplante et al. (2025), performing N posterior updates for each of the N datapoints. The datasets were acquired using BOED; one dataset for the well-specified setting, and the other for the asymmetric outlier setting. The data is not necessarily the same across both settings as a result, but all methods anyway see the same data for a specific setting.

Unweighted score matching results in very small differences from designs selected by a BOED regime in terms of BEIG, as seen in Table 6. However, when we start using weighted score matching or, in the case of the power likelihood loss function, choose a lower learning rate, the Gibbs EIG starts to deviate from the BEIG. Using the method by Laplante et al. (2025) with c = 2 , and using a power likelihood with ω = 0 . 8 leads to the final set of designs being more different than those selected on the basis of maximising the BEIG (as in BOED). Interestingly, c = 10 is closer to the BEIG under misspecification than in the well-specified setting. Our exponential decay method also

Figure 6: Methods compared on the well-specified scenario and the two misspecified scenarios, for the linear regression problem. Top row displays the well-specified scenario with RMSE, MMD, and NLL from left to right. Middle row displays the asymmetric outlier scenario. Bottom row displays the Laplacian error distribution scenario.

picture-8.png

appears to be close to the BEIG under misspecification for b = 0 . 04 , likely a result of c not falling too quickly during experimentation, unlike the method by Laplante et al. (2025).

As we see below, even with a fixed dataset of designs and observations, Gibbs inference leads Bayesian inference by a good margin. A notable distinction between the results in the main paper and Table 6 is that predictive performance is generally poorer when we use this fixed dataset, in contrast to using the Gibbs EIG to adaptively select designs - meaning that the same sequence of designs chosen by the BEIG under BOED is not optimal for Gibbs inference.

## G.3.3 Result of Using Different Rates in the Exponential Decay Method

We can view in practice the effect of using different rates b from Appendix G.2 on the final predictive performance in the regression problem. The results from varying b can be found in Table 7.

From Table 7, it would appear that very small decreases in c during experimentation are better than larger ones b = 0 . 04 is generally much better than b = 0 . 12 . Higher values of b would behave more similarly to the Laplante et al. (2025) method, which we know from Table 5 performs very poorly in our regression setting, in which the initial prior and true posterior are generally far apart. One could also investigate whether adjusting q 1 and q 2 in the exponential decay method would improve performance.

Table 6: Comparison of methods based on the absolute difference from BOED of designs selected (in terms of the BEIG) and the RMSE, MMD, and NLL under a fixed set of designs and observations in the regression problem. Mean (and standard error) over 90 replications. ω = 1 if not stated.

| Method                 | BEIG                | RMSE                | MMD                 | NLL                  |
|------------------------|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|----------------------|
| Well-Specified         | Well-Specified      | Well-Specified      | Well-Specified      | Well-Specified       |
| BOED                   | -                   | 1 . 7383 (0 . 0476) | 0 . 1340 (0 . 0119) | 1 . 8032 (0 . 0499)  |
| Power-Like ω = 0 . 8   | 0 . 0031 (0 . 0009) | 1 . 8439 (0 . 0555) | 0 . 1787 (0 . 0149) | 1 . 9474 (0 . 0619)  |
| Unweighted-SM          | 0 . 0011 (0 . 0014) | 1.5981 (0.0395)     | 0.0757 (0.0080)     | 1.6258 (0.0365)      |
| Laplante et al. (2025) | 0 . 0441 (0 . 0035) | 6 . 9071 (0 . 4383) | 0 . 9425 (0 . 0661) | 31 . 7845 (2 . 4816) |
| r IMQ | c = 2          | 0 . 0480 (0 . 0040) | 5 . 5147 (0 . 3793) | 0 . 8503 (0 . 0634) | 19 . 7778 (1 . 7382) |
| r IMQ | c = 10         | 0 . 0033 (0 . 0014) | 1 . 6037 (0 . 0403) | 0 . 0781 (0 . 0083) | 1 . 6331 (0 . 0377)  |
| Exp-Decay b = 0 . 04   | 0 . 0028 (0 . 0014) | 1 . 6118 (0 . 0419) | 0 . 0814 (0 . 0091) | 1 . 6450 (0 . 0405)  |
| Exp-Decay b = 0 . 08   | 0 . 0023 (0 . 0014) | 1 . 6544 (0 . 0553) | 0 . 0966 (0 . 0144) | 1 . 7353 (0 . 0844)  |
| Exp-Decay b = 0 . 10   | 0 . 0012 (0 . 0014) | 1 . 7131 (0 . 0764) | 0 . 1131 (0 . 0193) | 1 . 9027 (0 . 1740)  |
| Asymmetric Outliers    | Asymmetric Outliers | Asymmetric Outliers | Asymmetric Outliers | Asymmetric Outliers  |
| BOED                   | -                   | 2 . 6952 (0 . 1224) | 0 . 5479 (0 . 0341) | 4 . 0477 (0 . 3282)  |
| Power-Like ω = 0 . 8   | 0 . 0031 (0 . 0012) | 2 . 7981 (0 . 1298) | 0 . 5775 (0 . 0357) | 4 . 2296 (0 . 3442)  |
| Unweighted-SM          | 0 . 0007 (0 . 0013) | 2.5568 (0.1125)     | 0 . 5121 (0 . 0323) | 3.8674 (0.3104)      |
| Laplante et al. (2025) | 0 . 0453 (0 . 0036) | 6 . 8142 (0 . 4061) | 1 . 0218 (0 . 0595) | 29 . 0563 (2 . 228)  |
| r IMQ | c = 2          | 0 . 0499 (0 . 0046) | 5 . 3316 (0 . 3580) | 0 . 8948 (0 . 0600) | 17 . 3778 (1 . 5928) |
| r IMQ | c = 10         | 0 . 0014 (0 . 0013) | 2 . 5646 (0 . 1181) | 0 . 5045 (0 . 0340) | 3 . 9041 (0 . 3199)  |
| Exp-Decay b = 0 . 04   | 0 . 0017 (0 . 0014) | 2 . 5854 (0 . 1243) | 0.5031 (0.0356)     | 3 . 9824 (0 . 3358)  |
| Exp-Decay b = 0 . 08   | 0 . 0023 (0 . 0014) | 2 . 6330 (0 . 1349) | 0 . 5056 (0 . 0381) | 4 . 1507 (0 . 3655)  |
| Exp-Decay b = 0 . 10   | 0 . 0015 (0 . 0015) | 2 . 6716 (0 . 1421) | 0 . 5096 (0 . 0397) | 4 . 2866 (0 . 3872)  |

Table 7: Comparison of different rates b from the exponential decay method under both well-specified and misspecified scenarios in the regression problem, with ω = 1 and ( q 1 , q 2 ) = (9 , 1) . RMSE, MMD, and NLL are recorded with mean (and standard error) over 3 different models, each replicated under 30 random seeds (3 × 30 = 90 replications in total ) .

| Rate                | RMSE                | MMD                 | NLL                 |
|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|
| Well-Specified      | Well-Specified      | Well-Specified      | Well-Specified      |
| b = 0 . 04          | 1.6024 (0.0402)     | 0.0768 (0.0079)     | 1.6288 (0.0371)     |
| b = 0 . 06          | 1 . 6086 (0 . 0415) | 0 . 0793 (0 . 0086) | 1 . 6377 (0 . 0393) |
| b = 0 . 08          | 1 . 6191 (0 . 0428) | 0 . 0837 (0 . 0090) | 1 . 6517 (0 . 0410) |
| b = 0 . 10          | 1 . 6418 (0 . 0475) | 0 . 0931 (0 . 0112) | 1 . 6891 (0 . 0503) |
| b = 0 . 12          | 1 . 6954 (0 . 0632) | 0 . 1114 (0 . 0170) | 1 . 8088 (0 . 0997) |
| Asymmetric Outliers | Asymmetric Outliers | Asymmetric Outliers | Asymmetric Outliers |
| b = 0 . 04          | 2.4716 (0.1016)     | 0.4803 (0.0314)     | 3.4828 (0.2064)     |
| b = 0 . 06          | 2 . 4815 (0 . 1072) | 0 . 4766 (0 . 0326) | 3 . 5221 (0 . 2244) |
| b = 0 . 08          | 2 . 5163 (0 . 1152) | 0 . 4806 (0 . 0342) | 3 . 6306 (0 . 2473) |
| b = 0 . 10          | 2 . 5908 (0 . 1310) | 0 . 4911 (0 . 0367) | 3 . 9014 (0 . 3102) |
| b = 0 . 12          | 2 . 6481 (0 . 1421) | 0 . 4997 (0 . 0384) | 4 . 0867 (0 . 3496) |
| Laplacian Errors    | Laplacian Errors    | Laplacian Errors    | Laplacian Errors    |
| b = 0 . 04          | 1.9652 (0.0487)     | 0.1125 (0.0115)     | 2.2494 (0.0534)     |
| b = 0 . 06          | 1 . 9708 (0 . 0504) | 0 . 1141 (0 . 0120) | 2 . 2581 (0 . 0567) |
| b = 0 . 08          | 1 . 9841 (0 . 0537) | 0 . 1185 (0 . 0132) | 2 . 2861 (0 . 0663) |
| b = 0 . 10          | 1 . 9995 (0 . 0604) | 0 . 1218 (0 . 0147) | 2 . 3321 (0 . 0998) |
| b = 0 . 12          | 2 . 1027 (0 . 0947) | 0 . 1480 (0 . 0210) | 2 . 6729 (0 . 2668) |

## G.3.4 Visualising the Gibbs EIG

We explain the impact of different downweighting rates c in Appendix A.5, and this can be visualised in Figure 3. The effect of changing the learning rate ω on the Gibbs EIG is presented in Figure 4, with a review of learning rate selection in Appendix D. Smaller learning rates appear to result in lower EIG values being output overall. In linear regression, a smaller learning rate also results in the extremes of the design space not always being queried, unlike with the BEIG. Changing the downweighting rate has similar behaviour.

## G.4 Pharmacokinetics

## G.4.1 Complete Results

The results presented in the main paper with all methods and metrics can be found in Table 8. We see that BOED is strong in well-specified settings, but much weaker than GBOED when the model is misspecified. The RMSE disagrees with the MMD and NLL for the misspecified error variance scenario, and suggests that BOED is strongest. Since the RMSE is the only metric suggesting different conclusions, we make conclusions based on the MMD and NLL. Interestingly, GBOED with power likelihoods in the well-specified setting perform better than BOED, which may be a result of improved design selection via the Gibbs EIG, and/or better variational inference. On average, the Gibbs EIG appears more powerful in every scenario (whether misspecified or not) than using the BEIG or random acquisition with Gibbs inference. Figure 7 shows performance across the entire experimental horizon, with all three metrics, and for the well-specified, asymmetric outlier, and misspecified error distribution scenarios.

## G.4.2 Sensitivity to Learning Rate

The learning rate ω can severely affect performance if set poorly. Table 9 displays the results of using ω = 0 . 4 for the well-specified and asymmetric outlier scenarios, and ω = 0 . 2 for the misspecified error variance scenario. Results appear Table 8. The prior is not far from the true posterior, so smaller learning rates can focus more on robustly learning from data in misspecified settings, without worrying about slow learning in general.

Although using random acquisition or the BEIG with Gibbs inference can perform better than using the Gibbs EIG (comparing both Table 8 and Table 9) with the different learning rates used to compute the statistics in Table 9, the performance is still not better than using full GBOED (with the Gibbs EIG) when the learning rates are those used to compute the statistics in Table 8.

## G.4.3 Visualising the Gibbs EIG

We present in Figure 8 the (Gibbs) EIG for a fixed prior. When the loss function is the negative log-likelihood and ω = 1 , i.e., for the BEIG, the designs with maximal EIG are between 15 < ξ < 20 . This remains the same when ω = 0 . 4 , though different designs within the region are optimal. When we use (unweighted) score matching, the Gibbs EIG is vastly different to the others. The maximal EIG is instead within 13 < ξ < 17 , and the Gibbs EIG values are overall much larger than those computed under different loss functions. Weighted score matching instead assigns the greatest EIG at 22 ≤ ξ ≤ 24 (the rightmost extreme), showing greater differences between the curves, rather than those seen for the linear regression problem in Figure 3 and Figure 4.

## G.4.4 Deployment Times

Table 10 presents the average duration of experimentation (deployment time) in all T = 5 experiments for the pharmacokinetics problem, including both selecting optimal designs and computing posteriors. We find that the deployment time of our experiments is affected by the choice and implementation of the loss function. Our considered loss functions can be more expensive than using BOED out of the box in Pyro (Bingham et al., 2018) due to requiring more calculations, such as the predictive mean and r IMQ as a whole. This likely is the reason why selecting designs randomly with Gibbs inference is more expensive than just performing BOED; Gibbs inference can be more expensive than Bayesian inference.

Table 8: Comparison of methods under both well-specified ( ω = 0 . 8) and misspecified scenarios ( ω = 0 . 1) in the pharmacokinetics problem. ( q 1 , q 2 ) = (0 . 8 , 0 . 2) and b = 0 . 04 for the exponential decay method. RMSE, MMD, and NLL are reported with mean (and standard error) over 100 replications.

| Method                      | RMSE                        | MMD                         | NLL                         |
|-----------------------------|-----------------------------|-----------------------------|-----------------------------|
| Well-Specified              | Well-Specified              | Well-Specified              | Well-Specified              |
| BOED                        | 1 . 4047 (0 . 0139)         | 0 . 1223 (0 . 0088)         | 1 . 4166 (0 . 0331)         |
| Power-Like ω = 0 . 8        | 1.3980 (0.0124)             | 0.1157 (0.0075)             | 1.3770 (0.0254)             |
| Unweighted-SM               | 1 . 8908 (0 . 0208)         | 0 . 3505 (0 . 0098)         | 2 . 9027 (0 . 0815)         |
| Laplante et al. (2025)      | 1 . 5190 (0 . 0212)         | 0 . 2082 (0 . 0131)         | 1 . 8123 (0 . 0626)         |
| Exp-Decay b = 0 . 04        | 1 . 4831 (0 . 0268)         | 0 . 1764 (0 . 0145)         | 1 . 7411 (0 . 1153)         |
| Random + Exp-Decay          | 1 . 9565 (0 . 0343)         | 0 . 3291 (0 . 0151)         | 2 . 9925 (0 . 1276)         |
| BEIG + Exp-Decay            | 1 . 8226 (0 . 0320)         | 0 . 3564 (0 . 0212)         | 2 . 7030 (0 . 1784)         |
| Random + Laplante           | 1 . 9523 (0 . 0390)         | 0 . 3418 (0 . 0178)         | 3 . 0480 (0 . 1425)         |
| BEIG + Laplante             | 1 . 7951 (0 . 0274)         | 0 . 3482 (0 . 0199)         | 2 . 6574 (0 . 1614)         |
| Asymmetric Outliers         | Asymmetric Outliers         | Asymmetric Outliers         | Asymmetric Outliers         |
| BOED                        | 12 . 5387 (1 . 8300)        | 0 . 9163 (0 . 0582)         | 16 . 1877 (1 . 6433)        |
| Power-Like ω = 0 . 1        | 8 . 7469 (1 . 2392)         | 0 . 8579 (0 . 0498)         | 10 . 5812 (1 . 2877)        |
| Unweighted-SM               | 23 . 5026 (2 . 1511)        | 1 . 0789 (0 . 0676)         | 22 . 8389 (1 . 7987)        |
| Laplante et al. (2025)      | 3 . 5266 (0 . 0297)         | 0 . 4408 (0 . 0062)         | 2 . 2112 (0 . 0168)         |
| Exp-Decay b = 0 . 04        | 3.4476 (0.0251)             | 0.4256 (0.0056)             | 2.1693 (0.0143)             |
| Random + Exp-Decay          | 3 . 4908 (0 . 0268)         | 0 . 4396 (0 . 0055)         | 2 . 2037 (0 . 0152)         |
| BEIG + Exp-Decay            | 3 . 4734 (0 . 0229)         | 0 . 4344 (0 . 0053)         | 2 . 1897 (0 . 0138)         |
| Random + Laplante           | 3 . 5133 (0 . 0288)         | 0 . 4508 (0 . 0059)         | 2 . 2334 (0 . 0168)         |
| BEIG + Laplante             | 3 . 5400 (0 . 0282)         | 0 . 4483 (0 . 0060)         | 2 . 2290 (0 . 0166)         |
| Misspecified Error Variance | Misspecified Error Variance | Misspecified Error Variance | Misspecified Error Variance |
| BOED                        | 2.5538 (0.0701)             | 0 . 2506 (0 . 0124)         | 4 . 9780 (0 . 2977)         |
| Power-Like ω = 0 . 1        | 3 . 0046 (0 . 0580)         | 0 . 2316 (0 . 0077)         | 3 . 8735 (0 . 1096)         |
| Unweighted-SM               | 2 . 9909 (0 . 3115)         | 0 . 2969 (0 . 0206)         | 5 . 3510 (0 . 3751)         |
| Laplante et al. (2025)      | 3 . 9093 (0 . 0478)         | 0 . 2230 (0 . 0064)         | 2 . 9374 (0 . 0362)         |
| Exp-Decay b = 0 . 04        | 3 . 9101 (0 . 0473)         | 0.2184 (0.0068)             | 2.9107 (0.0342)             |
| Random + Exp-Decay          | 4 . 1663 (0 . 0550)         | 0 . 2709 (0 . 0068)         | 3 . 0987 (0 . 0442)         |
| BEIG + Exp-Decay            | 3 . 9971 (0 . 0500)         | 0 . 2413 (0 . 0060)         | 3 . 0015 (0 . 0389)         |
| Random + Laplante           | 4 . 1514 (0 . 0557)         | 0 . 2763 (0 . 0071)         | 3 . 1387 (0 . 0474)         |
| BEIG + Laplante             | 3 . 9596 (0 . 0492)         | 0 . 2371 (0 . 0062)         | 2 . 9961 (0 . 0390)         |

## G.5 Location Finding

## G.5.1 Complete Results

The results presented in the main paper with all methods and metrics can be found in Table 11, now also with increased precision by one decimal place. The metrics do not always agree with each other, but generally methods that use Gibbs inference outperform BOED. Figure 9 shows performance across the entire experimental horizon for d = 2 , with all three metrics, and for the well-specified, asymmetric outlier, and misspecified error distribution scenarios.

We find that fully GBOED-based methods, particularly with the loss function and inference method by Laplante et al. (2025), can beat BOED in predictive performance. Our ablation studies suggest that this relative performance is likely largely obtained through Gibbs inference, rather than to the Gibbs EIG: GBOED does not always outperform use of the BEIG or a random design selection together with Gibbs inference, in other words, when we do not use the Gibbs EIG. Randomly selecting designs appears to perform the best on average. This is mostly true for lower dimensions. The exception is in the misspecified error variance scenario, where using the BEIG or Gibbs EIG usually performs better instead.

RMSE

Figure 7: Methods compared on the well-specified scenario and the two misspecified scenarios, for the pharmacokinetics problem. Top row displays the well-specified scenario with RMSE, MMD, and NLL from left to right. Middle row displays the asymmetric outlier scenario. Bottom row displays the misspecified error distribution scenario.

picture-9.png

Figure 8: Comparison of different loss functions for computing the Gibbs EIG, under the pharmacokinetics problem. Marked crosses are the 5 designs with the greatest (Gibbs) EIG for a particular curve.

picture-10.png

Table 9: Comparison of methods under both well-specified and misspecified scenarios in the pharmacokinetics problem, with ω = 0 . 4 for the well-specified and asymmetric outlier scenarios, and ω = 0 . 2 for the misspecified error variance scenario. ( q 1 , q 2 ) = (0 . 8 , 0 . 2) and b = 0 . 04 for the exponential decay method. RMSE, MMD, and NLL are reported with mean (and standard error) over 100 replications.

| Method                      | RMSE                        | MMD                         | NLL                         |
|-----------------------------|-----------------------------|-----------------------------|-----------------------------|
| Well-Specified              | Well-Specified              | Well-Specified              | Well-Specified              |
| BOED                        | 1.4047 (0.0139)             | 0.1223 (0.0088)             | 1.4166 (0.0331)             |
| Power-Like ω = 0 . 4        | 1 . 5555 (0 . 0173)         | 0 . 1656 (0 . 0081)         | 1 . 5400 (0 . 0315)         |
| Unweighted-SM               | 1 . 8085 (0 . 0178)         | 0 . 3148 (0 . 0093)         | 2 . 5261 (0 . 0628)         |
| Laplante et al. (2025)      | 2 . 0657 (0 . 0287)         | 0 . 3386 (0 . 0119)         | 2 . 3824 (0 . 0670)         |
| Exp-Decay b = 0 . 04        | 2 . 1993 (0 . 0305)         | 0 . 3734 (0 . 0120)         | 2 . 7099 (0 . 0743)         |
| Random + Exp-Decay          | 2 . 2825 (0 . 0423)         | 0 . 3584 (0 . 0123)         | 2 . 4416 (0 . 0698)         |
| BEIG + Exp-Decay            | 2 . 1039 (0 . 0248)         | 0 . 3487 (0 . 0100)         | 2 . 4853 (0 . 0607)         |
| Random + Laplante           | 2 . 0981 (0 . 0344)         | 0 . 3220 (0 . 0131)         | 2 . 3295 (0 . 0772)         |
| BEIG + Laplante             | 1 . 9072 (0 . 0225)         | 0 . 2913 (0 . 0094)         | 2 . 0929 (0 . 0461)         |
| Asymmetric Outliers         | Asymmetric Outliers         | Asymmetric Outliers         | Asymmetric Outliers         |
| BOED                        | 12 . 5387 (1 . 8300)        | 0 . 9163 (0 . 0582)         | 16 . 1877 (1 . 6433)        |
| Power-Like ω = 0 . 4        | 10 . 9322 (1 . 7273)        | 0 . 9413 (0 . 0505)         | 13 . 9991 (1 . 3953)        |
| Unweighted-SM               | 36 . 9604 (3 . 7062)        | 1 . 3193 (0 . 0587)         | 27 . 5834 (1 . 7469)        |
| Laplante et al. (2025)      | 9 . 2519 (0 . 6816)         | 0 . 9138 (0 . 0538)         | 13 . 7762 (1 . 0822)        |
| Exp-Decay b = 0 . 04        | 6 . 3912 (0 . 4450)         | 0 . 7856 (0 . 0430)         | 8 . 2364 (0 . 6687)         |
| Random + Exp-Decay          | 3.7863 (0.1766)             | 0.5680 (0.0259)             | 3.3209 (0.1707)             |
| BEIG + Exp-Decay            | 4 . 7825 (0 . 3071)         | 0 . 6333 (0 . 0339)         | 5 . 1077 (0 . 3765)         |
| Random + Laplante           | 5 . 2808 (0 . 3609)         | 0 . 7226 (0 . 0403)         | 6 . 7262 (0 . 5660)         |
| BEIG + Laplante             | 8 . 0723 (0 . 6355)         | 0 . 8338 (0 . 0516)         | 11 . 7659 (0 . 9788)        |
| Misspecified Error Variance | Misspecified Error Variance | Misspecified Error Variance | Misspecified Error Variance |
| BOED                        | 2.5538 (0.0701)             | 0 . 2506 (0 . 0124)         | 4 . 9780 (0 . 2977)         |
| Power-Like ω = 0 . 2        | 2 . 8883 (0 . 0629)         | 0 . 2497 (0 . 0075)         | 4 . 4074 (0 . 1586)         |
| Unweighted-SM               | 3 . 0248 (0 . 4020)         | 0 . 2933 (0 . 0184)         | 5 . 6814 (0 . 4065)         |
| Laplante et al. (2025)      | 3 . 3612 (0 . 0461)         | 0.2310 (0.0097)             | 3 . 4679 (0 . 0679)         |
| Exp-Decay b = 0 . 04        | 3 . 4097 (0 . 0477)         | 0 . 2344 (0 . 0104)         | 3 . 4671 (0 . 0728)         |
| Random + Exp-Decay          | 3 . 9548 (0 . 0605)         | 0 . 2903 (0 . 0104)         | 3 . 3712 (0 . 0727)         |
| BEIG + Exp-Decay            | 3 . 6047 (0 . 0525)         | 0 . 2461 (0 . 0092)         | 3.3189 (0.0649)             |
| Random + Laplante           | 3 . 8468 (0 . 0675)         | 0 . 2945 (0 . 0118)         | 3 . 4793 (0 . 0831)         |
| BEIG + Laplante             | 3 . 4652 (0 . 0520)         | 0 . 2426 (0 . 0089)         | 3 . 4113 (0 . 0695)         |

Table 10: Deployment times in seconds for the pharmacokinetics problem under the well-specified setting, with ω = 0 . 8 if not stated. Mean (and standard error) over 100 replications.

| Method                              | Deployment Time (s)                         |
|-------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------|
| BOED                                | 278.6617 (1.4281)                           |
| Power-Like ω = 0 . 8                | 343 . 9569 (0 . 9780)                       |
| Unweighted-SM                       | 336 . 1231 (0 . 6788)                       |
| Laplante et al. (2025)              | 480 . 7204 (8 . 9707)                       |
| Exp-Decay b = 0 . 04                | 424 . 3125 (1 . 7382)                       |
| Random + Exp-Decay BEIG + Exp-Decay | 343 . 5165 (3 . 6122) 377 . 5761 (0 . 4692) |

We should mention here that the BEIG may be powerful in the somewhat larger data setting that is location finding ( T = 30) with small learning rates for the Gibbs posterior. This is because the next posterior learnt is not so different from the immediately previous posterior, and so maximising the BEIG may be optimal in the somewhat mild misspecification settings we consider. This is while knowing that we ultimately conduct Gibbs inference, so no matter the designs selected (assuming a

large enough number of them), we will be conducting robust inferences against the curated dataset. We have already found in the other experimental design problems that the BEIG is not very powerful when there are only a few experiments to be conducted (and thus data to be collected).

Table 11: Comparison of methods across different dimensions d for the location finding problem under well-specified and misspecified scenarios, with ω = 0 . 2 if not stated. RMSE, MMD, and NLL are reported with mean (and standard error) over 100 replications.

picture-11.png

## G.5.2 Sensitivity to Learning Rate

As in the other experimental design problems, the learning rate ω too can have a great impact on performance in the location finding problem. Recall that the prior and true posterior are not that far apart, and so selecting a small learning rate is not problematic if we end up having enough data to conduct good inference (as we do here with T = 30 ).

The results in Table 12 show results when ω = 0 . 1 . The gaps in performance from using ω = 0 . 2 and now using ω = 0 . 1 are made narrow between randomly selecting designs and using either the BEIG or Gibbs EIG, suggesting that randomly selecting designs with Gibbs inference now performs worse than with ω = 0 . 2 , or rather that the BEIG and Gibbs EIG perform better.

Figure 9: Methods compared on the well-specified scenario and the two misspecified scenarios, for the 2D location finding problem. Top row displays the well-specified scenario with RMSE, MMD, and NLL from left to right. Middle row displays the asymmetric outlier scenario. Bottom row displays the misspecified error distribution scenario.

picture-12.png

## G.5.3 Random Design Selection with Gibbs Inference

We now discuss the use of random acquisition in selecting designs, together with Gibbs inference and the loss function/method by Laplante et al. (2025), in the location finding experimental design problem. This allows us to better understand how and why randomly selecting designs performs well.

We will keep this discussion to the case of ω = 0 . 2 , where randomly selecting designs generally does better (at least in lower dimensions) than the other methods we tested (see Table 11). The results from using the method for Gibbs inference as in Laplante et al. (2025) and using a design selection mechanism that randomly queries points in the design space can be found in Table 11 as Random .

In many situations, particularly in lower dimensions, using a random method for selecting designs appears to lead to better performance than using the Gibbs EIG to select designs. This suggests that maximising the Gibbs EIG in a myopic manner with Bayesian optimisation, the hyperparameters of which we explain in Appendix E.7, is not the best approach to tackling the location finding problem. By randomly selecting designs, one is often exploring many diverse regions of the design space, which in turn can help one learn a predictive model better. The Gibbs EIG (and BEIG) likely suffers from this challenge in exploration, which leads nicely to recent methods in learning policy networks that are non-myopic and can better navigate design spaces (Foster et al., 2021; Ivanova et al., 2021; Blau et al., 2022). Such methods look instead at gradient-based optimisation (Foster et al., 2020), or, more specifically, techniques commonly found in training reinforcement learning agents (Sutton and Barto, 2018; Blau et al., 2022; Lim et al., 2022).

picture-13.png

Table 12: Comparison of methods across different dimensions d for the location finding problem under well-specified and misspecified scenarios, with ω = 0 . 1 if not stated. RMSE, MMD, and NLL are reported with mean (and standard error) over 100 replications.

| (0 . 0002) (0.0001) (0.0001) (0.0001) (0 . 0001) (0.0001) (0 . 0010) (0 . 0001) (0 . 0001) (0 . 0001) (0.0001) (0 . 0001) (0 . 1256) (0.1253) (0.1253) (0.1253) (0 . 1253) (0.1253)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| (0 . 0001) 0 . 7285 (0.0000) 0.7276 (0.0000) 0.7276 (0.0000) 0.7276 (0.0000) 0 . 7278 (0.0000) 0.7276 (0 . 0003) 0 . 7782 (0 . 0000) 0 . 7282 (0.0000) 0 . 7278 (0.0000) 0 . 7278 (0.0000) 0.7277 (0.0000) 0 . 7278 (0 . 0058) 3 . 4771 (0.0058) 3.4702 (0.0058) 3.4702 (0.0058) 3 .4702 (0 . 0058) 3 . 4712 (0.0058) 3.4702                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
| 0 . 0009 0.0006 0.0006 0.0006 0.0006 0.0006 0 . 0182 0 . 0008 0.0006 0.0006 0.0006 0.0006 0 . 1521 0.1516 0.1516 0.1516 0 . 1517 0.1516                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |
| (0 . 0001) (0.0001) (0.0001) (0.0001) 0 . 7081 (0 . 0001) 0.7080 (0.0001) 0 . 7252 (0 . 0003) 0 . 7083 (0 . 0001) 0.7081 (0.0001) 0.7081 (0.0001) 0.7081 (0.0001) 0.7081 (0.0001) 1 . 3509 (0 . 0233) 1.3499 (0.0233) 1.3499 (0.0233) 1.3499 (0.0233) 1 . 3500 (0 . 0233) 1.3499 (0.0233)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| 0 . 7400 (0 . 0002) 0 . 9586 (0 . 0059) 0 . 7670 (0 . 0018) 0 . 7394 (0 . 0002) 0 . 7394 (0 . 0002) 0 . 7398 (0 . 0002) 0.7393 (0.0002) 3 . 4716 (0 . 1256) 3 . 4320 (0 . 1229) 3 . 4303 (0 . 1228) 3 . 4303 (0 . 1228) 3.4296 (0.1228) 3 . 4302 (0 . 1228)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
| 0 . 7450 (0 . 0010) 0 . 7084 (0 . 0001) 0 . 7416 (0 . 0004) 0.7080 (0.0001) 0 . 7400 (0 . 0002) 0.7080 (0.0001) 0 . 7400 (0 . 0002) 0.7080 (0.0001) 0.7399 (0.0002) (0.0001) (0 . 0020) (0 . 0006) (0.0001) (0.0001) (0 . 0001) (0.0001) (0 . 0058) (0 . 0057) (0.0057) (0.0057) (0.0057) (0.0057)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
| ell-Specified (0 . 0114) 0 . 7171 ( 0 . 0004) 0 . 0066 (0 . 0003) (0 . 0073) 0 . 7165 ( 0 . 0002) 0 . 0054 (0 . 0016) 0.7157 (0.0001) 0.0049 (0 . 0016) 0.7157 (0.0001) 0.0049 (0 . 0017) 0.7157 (0.0001) 0.0049 (0.0016) 0.7157 (0.0001) 0.0049 Outliers (0 . 0196) 0 . 7831 (0 . 0018) 0 . 0783 (0 . 0230) 0 . 7249 ( 0 . 0005) 0 . 0142 (0 . 0015) 0.7156 (0.0001) 0.0048 (0 . 0016) 0 . 7157 (0 . 0001) 0.0048 (0 . 0016) 0 . 7157 (0 . 0001) 0 . 0049 (0.0015) 0.7156 (0.0001) 0.0048 Error V ariance (0 . 1296) 1 . 3571 (0 . 0233) 0 . 1530 (0 . 1122) 1 . 3546 ( 0 . 0232) 0 . 1505 (0 . 1088) 1 . 3540 (0 . 0232) 0.1502 (0 . 1088) 1.3539 (0.0232) 0.1502 (0 . 1090) 1 . 3541 (0 . 0232) 0.1502 (0.1087) 1 . 3540 (0 . 0232) 0.1502 |
| (0 . 0004) 0 . 8341 (0 . 0005) 0 . 8343 (0.0004) 0.8330 Asymmetric (0 . 0050) 1 . 7770 (0 . 0061) 1 . 2077 (0 . 0004) 0 . 8326 (0 . 0005) 0 . 8330 (0 . 0005) 0 . 8338 (0.0004) 0.8321 Misspecified (0 . 0052) 3 . 8272 (0 . 0051) 3 . 3275 (0 . 0051) 3 . 2229 (0 . 0051) 3 . 2257 (0 . 0051) 3 . 2298 (0.0051) 3.2197                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |
| W . 0030) 0 . 0825 (0 . 0031) 1 . 0114 . 0027) 0 . 0561 (0 . 0022) 0 . 9014 . 0006) 0 . 0365 (0 . 0004) 0 . 8335 (0.0006) 0 . 0367 . 0006) 0 . 0369 . 0006) 0.0363 . 0046) 0 . 2848 . 0048) 0 . 1399 (0.0005) 0 . 0361 . 0005) 0 . 0362 . 0006) 0 . 0366 . 0005) 0.0360 . 0230) 0 . 1845 . 0226) 0 . 1526 (0.0226) 0 . 1446 . 0226) 0 . 1448 . 0226) 0 . 1452 . 0226) 0.1444                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
| (0 . 0951) 0 . 7902 (0 (0 . 0394) 0 . 7939 (0 (0.0057) 0 . 7748 (0 (0 . 0062) 0.7745 (0 . 0046) 0 . 7747 (0 (0 . 0058) 0 . 7753 (0 (0 . 1221) 0 . 9810 (0 (0 . 1188) 0 . 8643 (0 (0.0051) 0.7743 (0 . 0059) 0 . 7744 (0 (0 . 0045) 0 . 7744 (0 (0 . 0052) 0 . 7746 (0 (0 . 1504) 1 . 4154 (0 (0 . 1286) 1 . 4022 (0 (0 . 0758) 1.3896 (0 . 0772) 1 . 3897 (0 (0 . 0769) 1 . 3897 (0 (0.0756) 1 . 3897 (0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
| . 8234 . 1622 . 1523 . 1524 . 3926 . 7005 . 1664 . 1524 . 1427 . 6348 . 1598 . 7742 . 8232 . 8193                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
| 0 . 1481 (0 . 0013) 1 0 . 1465 (0 . 0016) 1 0 . 5713 (0 . 0165) 4 0 . 3699 (0 . 0170) 2 0.1439 (0.0014) 1.1389 0 . 1502 (0 . 0017) 1 0 . 1489 (0 . 0013) 1 0 . 1454 (0 . 0015) 1 0 . 2978 (0 . 0060) 5 0 . 2242 (0 . 0053) 4 0 . 1431 (0 . 0030) 2 0 . 1470 (0 . 0030) 2 0 . 1468 (0 . 0029) 2 0.1425 (0.0030) 2.7672                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
| 0 . 3665 (0 . 0131) 3 . 0747 0 . 2379 (0 . 0069) 1 0.1450 (0.0015) 1.1456 0 . 1492 (0 . 0016) 1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |
| (0 . 0156) (0 . 0095) (0 . 0027) (0 . 0027) (0.0022) (0 . 0023) (0 . 0199) (0 . 0187) (0 . 0027) (0 . 0032) (0.0022) (0 . 0026) (0 . 0227) (0 . 0238) (0 . 0202) (0 . 0204) (0.0204) (0 . 0202)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |
| 1 . 1277 1 . 0672 (2025) 1 . 0775 = 0 . 10 1 . 0718 1.0630 1 . 0811 1 . 3679 1 . 2281 (2025) 1 . 0748 = 0 . 10 1 . 0756 1.0657 1 . 0778 1 . 6371 1 . 6111 (2025) 1 . 5984 = 0 . 10 1 . 5965 1.5914 1 . 5993                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
| et al. b + Laplante Laplante et al. b + Laplante Laplante et al. b + Laplante Laplante                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |
| + + +                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
| BOED Unweighted-SM Laplante Exp-Decay Random BEIG BOED Unweighted-SM Laplante Exp-Decay Random BEIG BOED Unweighted-SM Laplante Exp-Decay Random BEIG                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |

Akey point under misspecification is that the clustering behaviour found in the left panel of Figure 10a under misspecification shows that BOED can waste precious resources on selecting poor designs, particularly due to being faced with outliers. A random acquisition method will generally avoid the clustering behaviour seen by both standard BOED and standard GBOED, which is likely why performance is much greater - BOED and GBOED can be prone to failure through myopic Bayesian optimisation, the hyperparameters of which we explain in Appendix E.7. Gradient-based optimisation is known to perform better than Bayesian optimisation (Foster et al., 2020), and so performance could be improved using this method of searching for the optimal design on the EIG surface. Although randomly selecting designs can perform better predictively, this does not necessarily mean that the designs themselves are good for creating a dataset. This can be seen in Figure 10a, where designs chosen randomly can sometimes be quite far from the true locations of the objects. The selected designs could also cluster within the same region by chance, and one may prefer the datasets provided by the BEIG or Gibbs EIG over that provided by a random method of acquisition. The performance achieved from randomly selecting designs is also likely due to the restricted design space. For a larger design space, say instead [ -10 , 10] d , the random acquisition strategy might exhibit far worse performance, as the designs could be much further away from the locations of the objects. There is

evidence to suggest that this may be true: Table 11 shows that the random acquisition method is less optimal in higher dimensions, where GBOED or using the BEIG to select designs can perform better.

Figure 10: Comparison of BOED, GBOED variants, and random design selection methods under well-specified and asymmetric outlier scenarios for the 2D location finding problem. Subfigure (a) shows BOED, GBOED with exponential decay, and random design selection with the Laplante et al. (2025) method for inference. Subfigure (b) shows GBOED with alternative loss functions and using the BEIG to select designs with the Laplante et al. (2025) method for inference.

picture-14.png

Experiment Order

(a) 2D location finding example of designs selected by BOED, GBOED with exponential decay, and a random method of selecting designs with Gibbs inference in the well-specified scenario and the asymmetric outlier scenario. Best performing runs out of 100 replications in terms of the NLL are shown. BOED under wellspecification achieves NLL 0 . 8031 and 1 . 6898 under misspecification. GBOED with exponential decay achieves NLL 1 . 1018 and 1 . 0461 under misspecification. Random under well-specification achieves NLL 1 . 0362 and 1 . 0665 under misspecification. ω = 0 . 2 if not stated.

picture-15.png

Experiment Order

(b) 2D location finding example of designs selected by GBOED with the unweighted score matching loss function, GBOED with the method by Laplante et al. (2025) for the loss function, and a mix of using the BEIG to select designs but using Gibbs inference with the loss function as by Laplante et al. (2025). Plots show both the well-specified and the asymmetric outlier scenarios. Best performing runs out of 100 replications in terms of the NLL are shown. Unweighted score matching under well-specification achieves NLL 1 . 1464 and 1 . 2756 under misspecification. Laplante et al. (2025) achieves NLL 1 . 0611 and 1 . 0414 under misspecification. BEIG and Laplante et al. (2025) under well-specification achieves NLL 1 . 0519 and 1 . 0553 under misspecification. ω = 0 . 2 if not stated.

We can also view histograms of the NLL for all 100 replications under a random acquisition method and using the Gibbs EIG to confirm whether there may be issues with the Bayesian optimisation regime. As seen in Figure 11, the random acquisition method generally does well more often on average than using the loss function by Laplante et al. (2025) for selecting designs with the Gibbs EIG (recall both use the same loss function for parameter inference). Using the Gibbs EIG does have the ability to achieve a lower NLL than randomly selecting designs, as seen in one example on the histogram. One can speculate that using the Gibbs EIG with a better design optimisation method than Bayesian optimisation could prove fruitful and increase this to many more cases.

We should lastly mention that since the performance of GBOED relies heavily on Gibbs inference, choosing smaller learning rates ω would cause the posterior to deviate less from the prior. This can drastically reduce the gap in performance between randomly selecting designs and using the Gibbs

Figure 11: NLL histograms for 100 replications on the 2D location finding problem under the asymmetric outlier scenario. ω = 0 . 2 if not stated.

picture-16.png

EIG, offering enhanced predictive performance. The drawback here is that the curated dataset would also change as a result; finding the right learning rate remains a difficult problem.

## G.5.4 Qualitative Analysis of Specific GBOED Methods

We have already seen how BOED, random acquisition, and GBOED with exponential decay behave qualitatively. We are still missing an account of how different loss functions behave in practice. This account would explain how design selection can contribute to quantitative differences in predictive performance, and what properties the selected designs exhibit that might be useful to an experimenter.

Figure 10b presents the designs queried from performing GBOED with unweighted score matching, the Laplante et al. (2025) method, and using the BEIG for selecting designs and the Laplante et al. (2025) method for inference. One may argue that unweighted score matching selects a very poor set of designs. Although several designs seem to be useful, such as those close to the object on the bottom right, and perhaps a few not too distant from the top left object, most of the designs seem to cluster around the same region - regardless of whether or not there is misspecification present. Most of the designs chosen in the well-specified setting are perpendicular to those in the misspecified setting. Due to the major clustering around tight regions of the design space, it is not clear whether there is sufficient exploration, and selecting designs so closely to others can imply wasted resources (especially as those on the top left do not get any closer to the top left object). This could be an issue with Bayesian optimisation for choosing optimal designs on the EIG surface, but the chances of this are low due to the other methods selecting designs much better.

Onto the other two methods, which behave similarly, the wild clustering behaviour from unweighted score matching is avoided. Instead, designs seem to be chosen somewhat close to the origin, perhaps the result of a unit Gaussian prior. Although both methods use the same method for inference, the BEIG seems to choose designs in a more clustered fashion than using standard GBOED with the loss function by Laplante et al. (2025). The Gibbs EIG seems to result in a greater distance between previously chosen designs, likely a result of using a small learning rate. All in all, neither method seems to select many of the designs around the objects like BOED would under well-specification (Figure 10a). Using the plots from the six different experimental design regimes, one could argue that GBOED with exponential decay offers the most useful dataset. The clustering behaviour is mostly avoided here, and there are some designs chosen close to the objects in both the well-specified and misspecified settings. Even if predictive performance is ultimately not the most optimal, one can still train a new model using the data gathered - of which many machine learning methods outside of Bayesian inference can be used.

## G.5.5 Expected Information Gained During Experimentation

Even though the Gibbs EIG is unique for each loss function, we can view how the EIG acquired during experimentation varies between loss functions. To do so, we present Figure 12, which displays the EIG gained on a 2D location finding problem under both the well-specified and asymmetric outlier scenarios.

An interesting finding is that the Gibbs EIG gathered through GBOED is generally quite consistent regardless of whether we are in a misspecified setting or not. This does not mean that the final designs chosen are the same across both scenarios. When we use traditional BOED with the BEIG, it seems that less information is acquired in the asymmetric outlier setting - likely a result of being unable to deal with outliers well enough during inference. The BEIG acquired from performing BOED closely trails behind using exponential decay with b = 0 . 10 for the asymmetric outlier setting.

Using unweighted score matching appears to assign roughly the same amount of Gibbs EIG for each design selected (the line is linear in the number of experiments), which could explain why it performs much worse in terms of predictive performance than in the regression problem. Tuning the learning rate ω can result in different behaviour.

Figure 12: Comparison of methods in the (maximum) Gibbs EIG acquired during experimentation for the 2D location finding problem. Mean (and standard error) over 100 replications. Left: Wellspecified setting. Right: Observations corrupted with asymmetric outliers. ω = 0 . 2 if not stated.

picture-17.png

## G.5.6 Deployment Times

Table 13 presents the average duration of experimentation (deployment time) in all T = 30 experiments for the 4D location finding problem, including both selecting optimal designs and computing posteriors. As in the pharmacokinetics problem, the choice of loss function can affect the deployment time of our experiments. All experiments here were run on the same node in ascending order (with the same start time), which may be why the difference between BOED and unweighted score matching, and the difference between the Laplante et al. (2025) method and exponential decay, are quite small.

Table 13: Deployment times in seconds for the 4D location finding problem under the well-specified setting, with ω = 0 . 2 if not stated. Mean (and standard error) over 100 replications.

| Method   | Deployment Time (s)    |
|----------|------------------------|
| BOED     | 1511 . 6394 (5 . 5374) |