---
modified:
  - 2026-04-28T21:19:56+02:00
created: 2026-04-28T07:39:59+02:00
---
#Random_Idea #Science_Fiction #Science_Computer #Writing [[2026-04-28]]

TLDR: Animals require sleep to transfer mid-term to long-term memory. Can this be modeled in LLMs to achieve AGI? ^d1f6fd

# Prompt
Does *any* multicellular organism exist which does not sleep? How about organisms with a central nervous system?
Literature suggests that sleep or sleep-like states have been shown in all or nearly-all animals, especially those with a nervous system. See: [Comparative biology of sleep in diverse animals](https://journals.biologists.com/jeb/article/226/14/jeb245677/324840/Comparative-biology-of-sleep-in-diverse-animals)
This claim is not uncontested. In my understanding, it comes down to the question of what sleep is. Organisms down to the level of nematodes show sleep-like periods of inactivity before molting, suggesting a very ancient evolution of sleep. On the other hand, it is unclear whether all non-vertebrates have equivalent brain wave patterns and increased sensory thresholds or just engage in *restful waking to conserve energy*. Another special case are continuous swimmers (like many sharks and shoal fish), for which unilateral sleep has not yet been demonstrated in all species, as well as blind animals, particularly in sensory input poor environments. Some speculate that sleep is required only in animals with complex sensory inputs as a means of pausing input to integrate the current world model and long term memory (bidirectionally). See: [Vertebrates That Never Sleep: Implications For Sleep’s Basic Function](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0361923098000185?via%3Dihub)

Whichever the case, sleep seems to be a biological necessity or at least a *good move* in organisms with complex neural circuits. Sleep transfers a *tally* of mid-term memory ("world model") built during the waking period into long term. It also updates that world model with longterm memories including genetic memory modules. 

# Synaptic Homeostasis
Recent strong evidence seems to confirm the hypothesis that sleep is required to re-iterate over experiences, increasing the synaptic representation of important / key experiences while *deleting the noise*. See: 
- General: [Sleep function and synaptic homeostasis - ScienceDirect](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1087079205000420) 
- Specific: [Selection of experience for memory by hippocampal sharp wave ripples](https://www.science.org/doi/epdf/10.1126/science.adk8261), 
- Layman's terms, Video: [Wie Ihr Gehirn auswählt, was es sich merkt](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ceFFEmkxTLg)

# Central Question
Could something like this be modeled by an LLM with iterative self prompting loop (conscious, awake) that builds a temporary context, interrupted by model training (sleep, dreaming). Could something like this even be *required* to achieve artificial general intelligence?

# Further thoughts
- Updating weights through back propagation in neural networks too thoroughly risks [Catastrophic forgetting](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Catastrophic_interference), which is seen in artificial neural networks but not humans. Is this a feature of network architecture, i.e., the multiple levels of long-term potentiation from synaptic to cellular to architectural evolution of the brain? Is this also a feature of model size compared to input? After all, humans require about a decade of daily inputs to form a somewhat stable network capable of formal logic and a number of nodes far far outweighing any artificial neural network available today in 2026. 
- Some work-arounds have been proposed, e.g., constraining nodes central for one task to *protect* it from being overwritten by newer training See: [#Arxiv 1612.00796](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1612.00796). 
- Dreaming may or may not be required in addition to consolidation. This replay / simulation and integration of short-term and mid-term memory may also help prevent catastrophic forgetting, as it replays (and thereby elastically constrains) old nodes. See [#Arxiv 1705.08690](https://arxiv.org/abs/1705.08690). 
- An overview of continual learning for LLMs, yet without daring an interpretation, can be found here: [Continual Learning of Large Language Models: A Comprehensive Survey](https://dl.acm.org/doi/full/10.1145/3735633#sec-7). 
- Panel of experts is itself a design to reduce catastrophic forgetting, as different circuits are used for and thus are trained on different tasks, preventing newer tasks overwriting currently unused "experts" / models. See: [#Arxiv 2406.16437](https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.16437). I would say this has some resemblance to human brains, which have specific specialized and rather static circuits for some tasks. On the other hand, I am surprised that the gating model, according to the aforementioned manuscript, has to be fixed / training must be terminated early, to achieve model convergence. Do humans have such a "gate" that remains fixed after early childhood to direct new experiences to appropriate circuits. Could this be a neural distillate of a worldview or personality?
- If I understand correctly, this paper suggests that during non-permanent learning (during the wakefulness period, if you want), short-term memory can be transferred into mid-term by just updating a subset of the global parameter space but leaving most parameters untouched. This could greatly reduce the requirement for full fine-tuning (sleep) as it "softly" integrates information beyond the immediate context window (short term) but below memory tagged for long term retention (sleep). See [#Arxiv 2106.09685](https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.09685). 
- System 2 thinking (reasoning) seems to require way more parameters than pure System 1 thinking (traditional LLMs). See: [From System 1 to System 2: A Survey of Reasoning Large Language Models](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2502.17419). Is this the reason that humans avoid system 2 when they can and that system 2 is so much slower and exhausting in humans? 
- Imaginer-models (called"Dreamer", but I don't like this term as it happens during execution / wakefulness of the model) interleave action and simulated action and thereby build a top-down world-view, somewhat like the brain does, to accelerate learning from fewer inputs. See: [#Arxiv 1912.01603](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1912.01603)

# Synthesis
In my idea about sleeping LLMs, a self-prompting LLM, possibly using an "Imaginer / Dreamer" design would continuously build (imagine) a world model. It would have an actual context window (short term memory, in humans only ~7 items), but transfer anything outside that immediate context into a temporary neural synaptic representation using systems like LORA; synaptic but not cellular or architectural potentiation; mid-term memory on a within-one-day level. High loss (surprise) triggers higher "attention" or tagging for consolidation (see [[Do Chatbots dream of electric sheep#Synaptic Homeostasis|Synaptic Homeostasis]] above). It would then periodically shut off for actual full-model fine-tuning; Deep Sleep; cellular and brain-architectural potentiation. It may use parameter constraints to prevent catastrophic forgetting in these fine-tuning phases. Such constraints may involve a panel of experts architecture, protecting *unused experts* from fine-tuning. Fine-tuning may also involve actual "dreaming", i.e., training on attention-filtered self-outputs, which in itself should protect older weights from catastrophic failure and may enhance generalization to cases that haven't yet been encountered. 

# Lightbulb moment
The following idea might be tinted by my father's scholarly interest in the neurology of "wanting", i.e., the ability of a well functioning brain to develop a will. This volition is separate from the executive function of a sentient agent to execute its will. Various machine learning techniques enable decent and growing executive functions, but the volition, to my understanding, always comes from the user, either through choosing the reward in reinforcement learning or through prompting in Chatbots. Looking at nature, volition is extremely badly understood. Like ethics and morale are all about what we should want. However, ultimately, one must consider volition a learned property of the human brain to recognize a difference between an observed and ideal state. Regressing, in the Freudian and conceptual stage, to the untrained consciousness of a newborn, the rewards are chemically hard coded. Then, a more and more complex world model is developed through continuous learning that enables more and more complex intermediary wants to achieve the same chemical end goal of pleasure and the absence of pain. Does that mean that
conscience and all the emergent phenomena like ethics are really just translation layers between happy chemicals and the world, i.e., a very complex and sometimes paradoxical optimization function for achieving more happy chemicals per given time? How does this translate to computers or more concisely: How to learn volition? 

Key pieces missing from LLMs IMO:
- Volition
- Continual world models
- Mid-term memory beyond the context window
- sleep for long term potentiation (or is that captured in attention-tagged fine tuning to a satisfactory degree?) 
- Dreaming, i.e., reiteration over model outputs with relatively high chaos in a save environment, both to preserve a central tendency while also improving local generalization to the