## Digital Discovery

## PAPER

picture-1.png

Cite this: Digital Discovery ,2025, 4 , 1066

Received 12th December 2024 Accepted 14th March 2025

DOI: 10.1039/d4dd00391h

rsc.li/digitaldiscovery

picture-2.png

View Article Online View Journal  | View Issue

## Measurements with noise: Bayesian optimization for co-optimizing noise and property discovery in automated experiments †

picture-3.png

Boris N. Slautin, * a Yu Liu, b Jan Dec, c Vladimir V. Shvartsman, a Doru C. Lupascu, a Maxim A. Ziatdinov d and Sergei V. Kalinin * bd

picture-4.png

Wehavedeveloped a Bayesian optimization (BO) work /uniFB02 owthat integrates intra-step noise optimization into automated experimental cycles. Traditional BO approaches in automated experiments focus on optimizing experimental trajectories but often overlook the impact of measurement noise on data quality and cost. Our proposed framework simultaneously optimizes both the target property and the associated measurement noise by introducing time as an additional input parameter, thereby balancing the signal-to-noise ratio and experimental duration. Two approaches are explored: a reward-driven noise optimization and a doubleoptimization acquisition function, both enhancing the e /uniFB03 ciency of automated work /uniFB02 ows by considering noise and cost within the optimization process. We validate our method through simulations and realworld experiments using Piezoresponse Force Microscopy (PFM), demonstrating the successful optimization of measurement duration and property exploration. Our approach o /uniFB00 ers a scalable solution for optimizing multiple variables in automated experimental work /uniFB02 ows, improving data quality, and reducing resource expenditure in materials science and beyond.

## Introduction

The rapid advancement of self-driven laboratories ranging from individual automated tools to labs integrating all stages from synthesis to characterization in a fully automated work /uniE104 ow, is currently transforming approaches in material exploration and experimental science as a whole. 1 -5 One of the key drivers behind these groundbreaking changes is the development of advanced machine-learning (ML) algorithms that can make decisions previously fully reliant on humans. 1,6 -8 The capability for decision-making is the key di /uniFB00 erence between simple automation with strict algorithms and higher-level automation used in scienti /uniE103 c research. Simple automation, which has been successfully implemented in various industrial processes at least since Henry Ford's time, follows strict algorithms with prede /uniE103 ned rules and procedures. In contrast, automation in exploration and optimization processes required for e.g. scienti /uniE103 c research o /uniE09D en involves iterative work /uniE104 ows with complex

|

decision-making at each step. 5 This allows for dynamic adjustments of the experiment trajectory based on real-time data and optimization strategies. While the complete exclusion of the operator from the automated loop remains impossible, the human role is gradually changing for more and more high-level decisions and mind-related work. Meanwhile, routine experimental procedures, which rely heavily rely on real-time data analysis for decision-making, are increasingly being handled by automated systems. 9 -11

Currently, the mainstay of automated experimentation (AE) work /uniE104 ows across numerous scienti /uniE103 c and industrial /uniE103 elds are the sequential Bayesian optimization (BO) algorithms. 12,13 The process is conducted within a domain-speci /uniE103 c experimental object space. BO-guided work /uniE104 ows have an iterative structure with an automated selection of the next candidate to be explored from the object space at each step. This selection is based on a prede /uniE103 ned policy and reward function and is independent of direct human choice. The examples of BO-driven optimization could involve searching for an optimal composition within a phase diagram for material optimization, 14 -16 adjusting parameters like pressure, temperature, laser /uniE104 uence, etc. for pulsed laser deposition, 17 micro-drilling, 18 laser annealing, 19 or selecting locations in the image plane for spectroscopic measurements in microscopy, 20,21 and so on. The BObased frameworks have proven to be e /uniFB00 ective in guiding experiments, ranging from single-modality explorations in combinatorial synthesis, scanning probe microscopy, or

electron microscopy to the co-orchestration of multiple modalities in one experimental cycle. 14,15,22 -24

In many cases, BO methods are built on the Gaussian Processes (GPs) as surrogate models capable of interpolation and uncertainty prediction over the parameter space. 13 However, the standard GP methods are purely data-driven, limiting their e /uniFB03 ciency in many situations. 25 Realistic physical systems are o /uniE09D en associated with ample prior physical knowledge, such as laws and dependencies. Incorporating this knowledge into the BO cycle can signi /uniE103 cantly enhance optimization e /uniFB03 cacy. 26,27 The common way to incorporate physical knowledge lies in specifying the mean function or kernel (covariance function) of the GP or de /uniE103 ning boundary conditions. 26,28 To embed more complex pre-acquired knowledge expressed in the form of high-dimensional datasets, advanced approaches such as Deep Kernel Learning can be utilized. 21,29,30 Recently it has been shown that the addition of the mean function as a probabilistic physical model in structural GP signi /uniE103 cantly increases the e /uniFB03 ciency of exploration for materials synthesis, 31 combinatorial library exploration, and physics discovery. 25,32

One of the key but seldom explored aspects of automated experiments is measurement noise. For purely data-driven applications, the noise level can be treated as a prior re /uniE104 ecting the degree of trust in the experimentally obtained observables, or as an optimization hyperparameter. Multiple approaches have been developed to enhance BO for noisy functions by advancing acquisition functions that explicitly integrate noise into the optimization process. These methods have been applied to both single-objective 33 -35 and multiobjective BO, 36 -40 enabling more robust and accurate optimization under uncertain and noisy conditions.

In physical systems, noise is not just an abstract prior but a measurable quantity that depends on multiple factors, including experimental conditions and parameters. For instance, in imaging and spectroscopic techniques, the noise level might be in /uniE104 uenced by exposure time, sensor sensitivity, environmental conditions, and other operational parameters. The noise level can be reduced by optimizing measurement parameters and by increasing the exposure time. However, increasing the duration of the experiment inescapably leads to the growth of the experiment times and hence costs. Thus, /uniE103 nding a trade-o /uniFB00 between the cost of an experiment and the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) is an optimization problem that needs to be solved in many experiments.

More generally, reducing the /uniE103 nancial expense of experimentation lies among the ultimate goals of experiment automatization. Thus, the cost of the experiment is one of the primary criteria for estimating the e /uniFB03 ciency of AE. In many cases, the /uniE103 nancial expense of experimentation is directly proportional to the time it consumes. Globally, two realistic approaches to experimentation can be distinguished: (1) budget-constrained experiments -maximizing exploration or optimization e /uniFB00 orts within a prede /uniE103 ned budget limit (time) for the entire experiment; (2) unrestricted experiments, where an algorithm must determine the best possible experimental trajectory according to the real-time feedback and without strict

time limitations. The time expenses are determined by the number of exploration steps and the duration of each iteration. Today, most BO approaches focus on optimizing the number of required exploration steps, with the duration of each step typically being prede /uniE103 ned. More advanced multi/uniE103 delity and orchestrated BO approaches navigate across di /uniFB00 erent /uniE103 delities or modalities to balance the cost of each iteration with the potential outcomes, thereby enhancing the e /uniFB03 cacy of exploration. 41 -43 However, the cost and duration of steps for each modality are typically assumed to be known as a constant. Optimizing not only the number of steps (experimental trajectory) but also the duration (cost) of each iteration should advance the e /uniFB03 ciency of AE. Such a budget-limited approach requires optimizing the entire experimental trajectory, allowing for variation in costs between di /uniFB00 erent steps during the experiment. In contrast, in unrestricted experiments, we can optimize the cost of the individual step and use the prede /uniE103 ned parameters for further investigation.

As a special case for automated experiments, we consider the intra-step optimization of the measurement times in the presence of noise. The exposure time is typically de /uniE103 ned by an operator before the measurements and remains constant throughout the experiment. At the same time, for many spectroscopical methods (XRD, Raman, etc. ) the exposure time is a major parameter that determines the signal-to-noise (SNR) ratio and therefore the amount of the gained information a /uniE09D er each iteration. It is important to note that the signi /uniE103 cance of optimizing measured noise increases with longer exposure times. For example, in Raman spectroscopy of high-quality crystals, the accumulation time may not exceed 0.1 seconds. While, for Raman measurements of lithiated electrode materials, where conductivity is much higher, accumulation times can extend to minutes or even tens of minutes. 44 This extended duration makes noise optimization critical, as it can signi /uniE103 -cantly impact the quality, reliability, and cost of the measurements. Precise measurements of scalar properties, such as the ultra-low DC electron conductivity of dielectric crystals, also follow this principle.

Here, we present a work /uniE104 ow for incorporating intra-step noise optimization into the BO GP cycle. The proposed work/uniE104 ow de /uniE103 nes the optimal exposure time to balance the quality and cost of each iteration directly within the cycle of the automated investigation of the target property. We explore the two alternative approaches: a reward-driven noise optimization and a double-optimization acquisition function. We validate our method through simulations and real-world experiments using Piezoresponse Force Microscopy (PFM).

## In-loop noise level optimization: a concept

To introduce the noise optimization work /uniE104 ow, we consider a case of optimization of property f ( x ) in 1D space x . For example, the x might represent a compositional axis within a combinatorial library. Property f can be either a scalar or a vector. Our goal is to simultaneously optimize the property f

and the noise associated with its experimental determination within a single optimization loop. To achieve this, we need to expand the input space of the optimization model by adding dimension -time ( t ). As a result, the optimization of property f will be carried out in the ( x , t ) space. While f ( x ) is independent of the measurement duration (exposure time), the noise (Noise f )in measuring f ( x ) is determined by the exposure time. In the general case, the noise level may also depend on the location along the x axis. However, for simplicity, we assume the noise to be independent of x , such that Noise f ( x , t ) = Noise f ( t ). As a result, we encounter an unusual situation where optimization of both f ( x ) and Noise f ( t ) occurs in a 2D space, however, each of the variables depends on only one of the two dimensions of the input space. We also note that whereas f ( x ) can be arbitrary, the measured noise is expected to be a monotonically decreasing function of measurement time and in many experimentally important cases follow simple behavior ( e.g. for Gaussian white noise or 1/ f noise).

At each iteration, the optimization process can be broken down into three sequential steps: (1) GP modeling of f and its uncertainty distribution within the input space ( x , t ), (2) construction of the acquisition function that incorporates the cost of the experiment for noise optimization, and (3) selection of the next location to discover at the extremum to the selected acquisition function in ( x , t ) space (Fig. 1). While the third step remains similar to the classical BO approaches, the construction of the surrogate GP model and the acquisition function are detailed below.

## MeasuredNoiseGP for f ( x ) predictions

The f optimization is carried out in the low dimensional ( x , t ) space making reasonable direct implementing GPs as surrogate model for BO. Here we utilize the MeasuredNoiseGP model, which incorporates noise, estimated from the experimental observations, into the model rather than inferring it as in traditional GP. 45 Experimental noise in the measured points can be calculated directly from spectrum acquisition or derived from repeated measurements of scalar values. The noise level at

Fig. 1 Scheme of double noise-property optimization work /uniFB02 ow.

picture-5.png

|

unexplored locations is predicted independently of the GP model used for f (the primary model). This prediction is performed using a separate model (noise model). The noise model is trained to predict the noise component based on the noise estimated in the already measured locations. Once the noise predictions are obtained, they are added to the diagonal of the covariance matrix of the primary model. This adjustment accounts for the additional uncertainty introduced by the noise. The resulting amended covariance matrix ( K 0 ) for f ( x ) in MeasuredNoiseGP model can be expressed as:

K 0 = K + diag(Noise f ), (1)

where K is the covariance matrix for the primary model, and Noise f is the prediction of the noise according to the noise model. Hence, eqn (1) enables re /uniE104 ection of the increased uncertainty due to the noise level.

To re /uniE104 ect the independence of the f ( x ) on t , the kernel function (covariance) of the primary model has been adjusted by deactivating the time dimension. In this scenario the kernel function solely depends on the distance between the projections of the measured points onto the x axis, ignoring their distribution relative to the t axis. The speci /uniE103 ed Mat'ern 5/2 kernel is expressed as:

k /C0 xi ; xj /C1 ¼ k scale /C2 /C18 1 þ ffiffiffi 5 p r þ 5 3 r 2 /C19 e /C0 ffiffi 5 p r ; (2)

where r = (( xi -xj )/ k length) 2 is the squared distance normalized by the k length. The k scale and k length are the kernel hyperparameters to be de /uniE103 ned in GP training. It is important to note that other GP kernels can also be similarly adapted for this purpose.

In many cases, optimizing the noise level is facilitated by our understanding of its nature and the availability of models to describe it. The noise in the system typically consists of timeindependent and time-dependent components. For many spectroscopical measurements, decaying noise arises as signal averaging is performed over longer acquisition times, with the noise level decreasing, following as 1 = ffiffi t p . In turn, the timeindependent noise component can be represented by a thermal, instrumental, and readout noise, for instance. The expression for the total noise may be written as:

Noise ð t Þ ¼ A 1 ffiffi t p þ A 0 (3)

where the constants A 0 and A 1 represent time-independent and time-dependent inclusions. The dependence of noise on the measurement duration is illustrated by the black line in Fig. 2a. Given that the noise structure is described by expression (3), a structured GP model with a speci /uniE103 ed mean function can be utilized to estimate the hyperparameters A 0 and A 1. It is crucial to ensure that the independence of noise from x is accurately re /uniE104 ected in the noise model.

## Acquisition function

The primary requirement for an acquisition function in BO is to identify the location that maximizes the expected bene /uniE103 t for

Fig. 2 Reward function for exposure time optimization. (a) Noise dependence on exposure time is depicted by the black line, representing the noise model. The background color illustrates the distribution of the reward across the ( t ,Noise) space. Parameters used: A 0 = 0.1, A 1 = 2, a = 0.1, b = 2. (b) Normalized pro /uniFB01 le of the reward function corresponding to the noise model.

picture-6.png

exploration during the next iteration. This means that the acquisition function de /uniE103 ned at the ( x , t ) space should exhibit a maximum or minimum at the most promising location for further exploration. In our case of the in-cycle noise optimization, the constructed acquisition function should follow both policies (1) optimization/exploration of the target property f ( x ) and (2) optimization of the exposure time. It should be noted that, while the objective for noise investigation remains the same regardless of the experiment, the policy for property optimization is de /uniE103 ned by an operator and may vary depending on the global experiment objective.

Direct construction of traditional acquisition functions (such as Maximum Uncertainty, Expected Improvement, Upper Con /uniE103 dence Bound, etc. ) based on GP predictions and uncertainties over the ( x , t ) space enable us to prioritize the location in x axis for measuring f ( x ) at the next step. At the same time, this approach is not suited for optimizing measurement duration.

To accomplish this goal, we proceed with the following derivation. From eqn (1), the total uncertainty includes the time-dependent noise component and the time-independent part:

V ½ f ð x Þ ; t /C138 ¼ V ½ f ð x Þ/C138 þ Noise f ð t Þ (4)

The measurements of f at each iteration introduce some additional knowledge and decrease the uncertainty. Concurrently, the noise level -dictated by our measurement capabilities and the exposure time -sets a theoretical limit, determining the maximum possible information gain and the minimum achievable uncertainty. In other words, we cannot de /uniE103 ne the f ( x ) for some exposure time t 0 with lower uncertainty than Noise f ( t 0). Lack of time dependence in the optimized property f ( x ) means that projecting uncertainty onto the time axis will merely re /uniE104 ect the noise model behavior. Guided by classical acquisition functions and unable to e /uniFB00 ectively reduce uncertainty, the algorithm will typically select the maximum available exposure time. This occurs because, in such a direct approach, the cost function de /uniE103 ning the optimal measurement time is not accounted for. In fact, the optimization of exposure time should be guided by a reward function, which incorporates experimental cost information into the acquisition function model.

To optimize exposure time (and thereby reduce noise), it is necessary to introduce a cost model and a reward function ( R ) that balance the cost against the achievable noise level for a single measurement. In the simplest case, the cost of our measurements is determined solely by the exposure time and depends linearly on it: R (Cose( t ),Noise) = R ( t ,Noise).

Given that our goal is to minimize noise while also minimizing cost ( i.e. , exposure time), our reward should decrease as either exposure time or noise increases. There are no strict rules to construct the reward function besides the principles mentioned above. In our experiments, we de /uniE103 ned the reward function for noise optimization as follows:

R ( t ,Noise) = -a × t 2 -b × Noise, (5)

where a and b are coe /uniFB03 cients. These coe /uniFB03 cients are used to make the units of the noise and exposure time compatible and to balance their contributions within the reward function. We chose a quadratic dependence of the reward on the exposure time and a linear dependence on the noise level (Fig. 2a, background color). However, alternative combinations of these dependencies can also be considered. Given the distinct model Noise f ( t ), optimal exposure time can be de /uniE103 ned from the pro /uniE103 le of the reward function along the noise model R ( t ,Noise = Noise f ) (Fig. 2b). To ensure that the reward function is wellscaled, we normalized it to the range [0,1].

Given the reward function, the acquisition function can be adjusted to capture the interdependency between the measurement cost (duration) and the noise level. Below, we outline two approaches for integrating noise optimization into the investigation of f ( x ) by incorporating the reward function into the acquisition function:

(1) Pure reward-driven noise optimization: in this approach, the reward serves as a weighting function for classical acquisition functions, which prioritizes certain exposure time. This method directly incorporates noise considerations into the reward mechanism.

(2) Double-optimization acquisition: this approach uses an arti /uniE103 cial total acquisition function that integrates two ' independent ' components: the /uniE103 rst is an acquisition function tailored for optimizing f ( x ), and the second is a time acquisition function built around the noise reward function and the uncertainty in the noise model predictions. Each component addresses a distinct objective, enabling both noise and function optimization within a Bayesian framework.

In the pure reward-driven approach, the reward function acts as a weighting factor for the classical acquisition function de /uniE103 ned over the entire ( x , t ) space:

acq f ð x ; t Þ ¼ acq x ð x ; t ; V ½ f ð x Þ ; t /C138Þ /C2 Norm ð R Þ g (6)

where acq f ( x , t ) is the resulting acquisition function, acq x ð x ; t ; V ½ f ð x Þ ; t /C138Þ is the classical acquisition function determined by x , t and full uncertainty V ½ f ð x Þ ; t /C138 , and g is the exponent of the weighting function. High very short (high noise) and very long measurement durations (high cost) becomes smaller. The exponential factor g is used to control the steepness of the reward function (Fig. 3a). The uncertainty of f increases as t

picture-7.png

picture-8.png

Fig. 3 Reward-driven optimization: (a) normalized reward functions (weighting functions) used to construct (b) acquisition functions for di /uniFB00 erent exponential factors ( g ). (c) Optimal time predictions as a function of the g . The ground truth optimal time is represented by the black dashed line.

picture-9.png

approaches to zero, following a least 1/ t (noise limit). The growth shi /uniE09D s the resulting acquisition function maximum when multiplied by the peak-shape reward function (Fig. 3b). However, increasing the steepness of the reward function reduces this e /uniFB00 ect, mitigating the shi /uniE09D (Fig. 3c).

Optimizing exposure time within a Bayesian framework requires constructing an acquisition function that balances the reward with its associated uncertainty. Since the reward function is derived from the noise model, the uncertainty propagation rule can be used to calculate the uncertainty of the reward. Classical BO approaches with acquisition function ( e.g. , Expected Improvement, Upper Con /uniE103 dence Band, etc. )de /uniE103 ned over ( x , t ) space (nominally, because R is independent on x ) allow for the optimization of exposure time. Since we cannot reduce the Noise f ( ti ) for the chosen point ( xi , ti ), we construct a surrogate acquisition function, acq x ð f ð x Þ ; V ½ f ð x Þ ; t 0 /C138Þ to optimize f ( x )by extending the uncertainty of f predicted at a speci /uniE103 c time V ½ f ð x Þ ; t ¼ t 0 /C138 across the entire ( x , t ) space.

The double-optimization acquisition function, acq f ( x , t ), should integrate both components described above: the exposure time optimization acquisition function and the selected acquisition function for optimizing f ( x ). The /uniE103 nal doubleoptimization acquisition function was constructed as a sum of the normalized acquisition functions for exposure time -acq t ( x , t ) and for f ( x ) -acq x ( x , t ).

acq f ( x , t ) = 1 2 [Norm(acq t ( x , t )) + Norm(acq x ( x , t ))] (7)

## Experimental

The gpax Python library was used to implement the Gaussian Processes. 45 To execute the work /uniE104 ow and principles outlined above, we modi /uniE103 ed both the MeasuredNoiseGP model and some kernel functions within the gpax library. Within the modi /uniE103 ed optimization model, noise prediction was carried out using a structured GP model with a speci /uniE103 ed mean function as in expression (3).

The e /uniFB03 ciency of the method was evaluated both through simulations and in the actual exploration of the local domain structure using the Piezoresponse Force Microscopy (PFM) technique.

In the simulations the f ( x ) study was driven by the pure exploration strategy (Uncertainty Exploration, UE). The exponential factor g is set to 5. In the double-optimization approach,

|

the EI acquisition function is used for the exposure time optimization. All simulation experiments start with 3 seed measurements in the random locations within input space and contain 15 subsequent exploration BO-guided steps. Before noise optimization converged, 30 repeated measurements of f ( xi )were simulated at each iteration. These measurements are used to determine the function value and assess the associated uncertainty at each measured point ( xi , ti ). The variance in the predicted time below 5 × 10 -4 for the last three steps is used as a criterion of the noise model convergence. A /uniE09D er the model has converged, f ( xi ) is estimated using 3 measurements, while the noise level is determined based on the model predictions for ti . The priors A 0 and A 1 in the noise mean function are sampled from a Uniform(0,15) distribution for both approaches.

The real automated experiment evaluation of the model e /uniFB03 ciency was performed using PFM using an MFP-3D (Oxford Instruments, USA) scanning probe microscope. Silicon probes with the conductive Pt/Cr coating Multi75 E-G were used for the response acquisition. The Dual Amplitude Resonance Tracking (DART) mode of PFM has been used to acquire the ground truth pro /uniE103 le. The resonance spectra were measured at a constant sampling rate of 10 kHz. Given the constant sampling rate, varying the sweep time led to changes in the number of acquired data points within the resonance curve, a /uniFB00 ecting the precision of the resonance /uniE103 tting by eqn (8) and, thereby, surface displacement amplitude estimation. The microscope is operated automatically via the AESPM Python library using a control program written in a Jupyter notebook. 46 The main calculations, including BO, are executed in Google Colab, which is connected to the microscope control notebook for real-time data exchange through a simple web server.

The objective of the real experiment was in the exploration of the piezoelectric response dependences (UE acquisition function) with simultaneous optimization of the sweep time (EI acquisition function). The double acquisition approach was used to guide the automated experiment. The experiment comprised 20 BO-guided steps, preceded by 3 preliminary seed measurements at random locations within the exploration space.

## Result and discussion

## Experiments simulations

In simulations of the real experiment, we emulated the investigation of a scalar variable dependency, with the uncertainty in the value of the variable estimated from repeated measurements. The simulations of the actual exploration were performed using the Forrester function (Fig. 4a). 47 Due to the complexity and non-linearity, the Forrester function is a widely recognized benchmark o /uniE09D en used to assess the performance of optimization algorithms. It is de /uniE103 ned as:

f ( x ) = (6 x -2) 2 sin(12 x -4), x ˛ [0,1] (8)

The ground truth noise model is de /uniE103 ned by eqn (3) with parameters A 0 = 0.1 and A 1 = 2 (Fig. 4b). The reward function

## Paper

Fig. 4 Ground truth (a) f ( x ) function and (b) noise model; (c) f ( x ) and (d) noise model de /uniFB01 ned over the exploration space.

picture-10.png

for optimizing exposure time is given by expression 5 with a = 0.1 and b = 2. The coe /uniFB03 cients a and b indirectly determine the cost function. The optimization process is constrained within the input space x ˛ [0,1] and t ˛ [0.2,10].

The experiment simulates the exploration of the Forrester function by the iterative measurements of f ( x ). At each exploration step, the automated agent selects the next location to be explored and the ' exposure ' time, which determines the precision of de /uniE103 ning f ( x ). The noise component is modeled as a normally distributed addition to the ground truth, with its standard deviation governed by the duration based on the ground truth noise model. Before the noise model converges, the algorithm estimates the noise level through repeated measurements at the exploration locations. Once the noise optimization converges, the noise estimation is derived from the optimized noise model. The idea and main goal of the experiment is to explore f ( x ) automatically, simultaneously optimizing the measurement duration.

The experiment simulation, driven by both the pure reward (Fig. 5a, c, e and g) and double acquisition approaches (Fig. 5b, d, f and h), demonstrated their ability to converge a /uniE09D er only a few BO-based exploration steps. However, notable di /uniFB00 erences in the evolution of the exploration process are observed between the two methods. We repeated the experiment in simulation mode multiple times for both approaches. The discussion below focuses on the comparison of the most representative results; additional outcomes are published on GitHub (see Data availability).

In most of our experiments, even with only three seeding locations, the algorithm o /uniE09D en succeeds in prioritizing duration ranges close to the true optimal time. However, the accuracy of this noise estimation heavily depends on the number of iterative measurements taken at each location. To ensure reliable estimation, we follow the empirical lower limit for parameter estimation of a normal distribution, using 30 measurements at each location.

Fig. 5 Automated experiment simulations using the (a, c, e and g) reward-driven approach and the (b, d, f and h) double-acquisition approach. (a and b) Experimental trajectories in the ( x , t ) exploration space. The background shading represents the acquisition function values. (c and d) Evolution of the optimal measurement time predictions with iteration number. (e and f) Predictions of f ( x ) and (g and h) Noise f ( t ) at the /uniFB01 nal exploration step. Data points in (a, b and e -h) are color-coded based on iteration number, with light green indicating the initial seed measurements. The UE acquisition function drives both simulations.

picture-11.png

The pure reward-driven approach demonstrates fast convergence a /uniE09D er a few BO iteration steps (Fig. 5c). Typically, the reward-driven model converges to a duration slightly lower than the ground truth value due to the combined e /uniFB00 ects of reward and noise, as discussed earlier (Fig. 5a and c). Increasing the exponential factor, g , further reduces this di /uniFB00 erence. It is important to note that, in the limit, the reward function can be substituted by a delta function with its peak at the optimal reward point. While the algorithm converges rapidly to the optimal exposure time, the estimation of the A 0 and A 1 parameters that de /uniE103 ne the noise model may not always align perfectly with the ground truth. The algorithm typically approximates the noise model accurately near the optimal exposure time, but predictions for both very high and very low durations may remain less accurate.

Experiments based on the double-acquisition method typically require a similar number of steps before the model

converges to the optimal measurement duration (Fig. 5d and S1 † ). Incorporating noise prediction uncertainty into the optimization process in a double-acquisition-driven approach typically improves noise model parameter predictions. However, this doesn't always lead to a signi /uniE103 cant enhancement in the accuracy of the optimal duration prediction. Additionally, the double-acquisition method does not exhibit the optimum shi /uniE09D e /uniFB00 ect, o /uniE09D en resulting in a slightly more accurate estimation of the ground truth duration.

Concurrently with exposure time optimization, both algorithms explore the Forrester function using the UE acquisition function, which is the main objective of the automated experiment. Important to note, that although we selected the uncertainty exploration, any other acquisition functions without restrictions can be employed for the f ( x ) exploration or optimization. The structure of the proposed approaches is capable of independent optimization of noise and function within the same cycle (Fig. 5e -h). The time dependencies of the acquisition function at di /uniFB00 erent locations exhibit similar pro /uniE103 les. Similarly, the projections onto the x -axis of time-constant pro /uniE103 les show analogous patterns. This is clearly illustrated by the visualization of the acquisition function values across the exploration space (Fig. 5a and b).

In our experiments, both the pure reward-driven and double acquisition-based approaches achieved convergence to optimal duration in more than 90% of the attempts during the /uniE103 rst 10 exploration steps independent of the seed locations. Beyond the simple exploration of the function f ( x ), the algorithm was also tested for optimization using the EI acquisition function (Fig. S2 † ). In these experiments, we observe that the noise model usually converges at a similar rate (Fig. S1 † ). No clear correlation was observed between the rate of measurement duration optimization and the optimization of the f ( x ) itself. This suggests that noise optimization does not interfere with the primary optimization process. It is important to note that both approaches successfully identify the optimal measurement duration with only 5 repetitive measurements at each point (Fig. S3 † ), which can be crucial for real-world experimentation. However, as the number of measurements per point decreases, the number of optimization steps required for convergence naturally increases.

## Real automated experiment

The primary objective of the real automated experiment was to reconstruct a 35 m m-long pro /uniE103 le of the PFM electromechanical response as it traversed the ferroelectric domains in [001] cut of a high-quality PbTiO3 single crystal (Fig. 6a). The measured by PFM local surface displacements arise due to the converse piezoelectric e /uniFB00 ect, re /uniE104 ecting the dependence of the piezoelectric coe /uniFB03 cient on the local domain structure. The ground truth pro /uniE103 le has been measured using the DART method. DART is primarily a qualitative technique, o /uniFB00 ering limited precision for quantitative piezoresponse characterization. 48 At the same time, it e /uniFB00 ectively captures the shape of a ' real ' pro /uniE103 le, re /uniE104 ecting variations in piezoresponse along the scanned line. The most precise approach for estimating these local surface

|

Fig. 6 Results of the real automated experiment. (a) PFM amplitude scan with the exploration pro /uniFB01 le marked in blue. The red point corresponds to location 0. (b) Comparison of the predicted PFM amplitude pro /uniFB01 le with the actual data extracted from the PFM scan. (c) Prediction of the Noise A ( t ) along with the explored points. (d) Evolution of the predicted optimal measurement times as a function of iteration number. (e) Experimental trajectory visualized in the ( x , t ) exploration space. The background shading represents the acquisition function values. Data points in (b, c and e) are color-coded based on iteration number, as indicated by the colorbar in (e), with light green representing the initial seed measurements.

picture-12.png

deformations induced by the piezoelectric e /uniFB00 ect involves /uniE103 tting the contact resonance curve (eqn (9)) obtained from the response to an AC voltage frequency sweep applied by the SPM probe. The measured resonances are /uniE103 tted using a simple harmonic oscillator (SHO) model:

r ð u Þ ¼ r real u 0 2 ffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffi ð u 2 /C0 u 0 2 Þ 2 þ /C18 uu 0 Q /C19 2 s (9)

where u is the frequency, r ( u ) is the measured amplitude of the surface displacement, r real is the actual amplitude, u 0 the resonance frequency and Q the quality factor. The uncertainty in the surface displacement, derived from the SHO /uniE103 tting, was determined based on the approximate covariance of the /uniE103 t. The x -axis in the study represents the distance from the starting point with the investigation pro /uniE103 le.

The predicted response dependencies a /uniE09D er 20 exploration steps, along with the actual data extracted from the PFM scan, are shown in Fig. 6b. The predicted pro /uniE103 le shape closely follows the real one measured by PFM, e /uniFB00 ectively reconstructing the actual pro /uniE103 le. It is important to note that for accurate domain reconstruction, implementing structured GP as a surrogate model would be more appropriate than the GP with a modi /uniE103 ed Mat'ern 5/2 kernel used in this experiment. However, for our speci /uniE103 c goals, the chosen model is more than adequate. The di /uniFB00 erences between the DART technique used for obtaining the ground truth pro /uniE103 le and response estimation from full

## Paper

resonance hinder direct comparison of absolute values. Therefore, the primary objective of our experiment was to accurately reconstruct the shape of the ground truth pro /uniE103 le rather than to match the absolute values.

The experiment trajectory clearly shows that, at each step, the algorithm selects spatial coordinates with the highest uncertainty, aligning with the UE acquisition function (Fig. 6e). The close match between the predicted pro /uniE103 le and the PFM scan response con /uniE103 rms the successful progression of the experiment toward the reconstruction objective. From the analysis of the exploration trajectory (Fig. 6d and e), it is evident that in the early stages, the model actively explores along the t -axis. However, a /uniE09D er 11 initial exploration steps, the model converges to a value of single spectrum measurement duration 0.41 s (Fig. 6c) representing the optimum for the chosen reward function (eqn (5)). This convergence toward the optimal value a /uniE09D er initial exploration is typical for BO driven by the EI acquisition function.

Overall, the proposed approach demonstrates its ability to pursue the prede /uniE103 ned primary objective -an exploration of the PFM response along the pro /uniE103 le -while simultaneously optimizing the resonance curve measurement duration. For greater statistical signi /uniE103 cance, we repeated our experiment multiple times with di /uniFB00 erent seed locations. In each case, the model successfully converges. The results of these experiments can be found in GitHub (see Data availability).

## Conclusions

To summarize, we propose a work /uniE104 ow for optimizing measurement duration in real-time during automated experiments. Our algorithm employs the MeasuredNoiseGP model, modi /uniE103 ed with specialized kernels. Optimization within this work /uniE104 ow can be driven by either a pure reward-based approach or a double optimization acquisition function. The pure rewarddriven approach relies solely on the prediction of the noise structure and demonstrates faster convergence to the optimal measurement duration. In contrast, the double optimization acquisition function, which incorporates noise model uncertainty into the process, o /uniFB00 ers a higher exploration impulse, leading to a more accurate reconstruction of the noise model, albeit requiring more iterations to converge.

The e /uniFB03 ciency of the proposed framework was validated through a simulation of the Forrester function exploration, a benchmark for optimization processes, and a real automated PFM experiment. In both cases, the framework successfully demonstrates its ability to simultaneously optimize measurement duration and the target property. Including measurement duration in the BO cycle was found to have no noticeable impact on the primary objective of optimizing the target function. When dealing with homoscedastic noise that is independent of x and a target function that is independent of exposure time, this addition does not result in an exponential increase in the required number of observations (curse of dimensionality). However, a moderate increase in computational complexity is expected due to the expanded dimensionality of the exploration space. Important to highlight, when expanding the number of

' ordinary ' variables, the same limitations faced by traditional BO-based approaches -such as the curse of dimensionality, the complexity of constructing accurate surrogate models, and the challenges of optimizing the acquisition function -still apply.

The proposed work /uniE104 ow incorporates intra-step optimization within the automated experiment, enhancing global optimization e /uniFB03 ciency by balancing knowledge acquisition with experimental costs. This approach is particularly valuable for automating spectroscopic measurements, such as Raman, XRD, etc. , where exposure (or accumulation) time is a critical hyperparameter.

## Data availability

The data that support the /uniE103 ndings of this study are available in the ESI † of this article. Code and raw experimental results have been uploaded to Zenodo with https://doi.org/10.5281/ zenodo.15024308 and available at GitHub with https:// github.com/Slautin/2024\_Noise\_BO (release version 1.0.0).

## Author contributions

Boris N. Slautin: conceptualization (equal); so /uniE09D ware (equal); data curation; writing -original dra /uniE09D . Yu Liu: so /uniE09D ware (equal). Jan Dec: resources; Vladimir V. Shvartsman: writing -review & editing (equal). Doru C. Lupascu: writing -review & editing (equal). Maxim A. Ziatdinov: so /uniE09D ware (equal). Sergei V. Kalinin: conceptualization (equal); supervision; writing -review & editing (lead).

## Con /uniFB02 icts of interest

There are no con /uniE104 icts to declare.

## Acknowledgements

This research (work /uniE104 ow design, SVK) was primarily supported by the National Science Foundation Materials Research Science and Engineering Center program through the UT Knoxville Center for Advanced Materials and Manufacturing (DMR2309083). VVS and DCL acknowledge the support by the German Research Foundation (DFG Project ' Molectra ' GR 4792/4-1, Project number 510095586). The development of the GPax Python package (MAZ) was supported by the Laboratory Directed Research and Development Program at Paci /uniE103 c Northwest National Laboratory, a multiprogram national laboratory operated by Battelle for the U.S. Department of Energy.

## References

- 1 H. Hysmith, E. Foadian, S. P. Padhy, S. V. Kalinin, R. G. Moore, O. S. Ovchinnikova and M. Ahmadi, Digital Discovery , 2024, 3 , 621.
- 2 Y. Xiao, P. Zheng, T. Yang, S. K. Chakravarty, J. RodriguezLopez, A. Urban and Z. Li, J. Electrochem. Soc. , 2023, 170 , 050538.

- 3 J. M. Gregoire, L. Zhou and J. A. Haber, Nat. Synth. , 2023, 2 , 493.
- 4 S. Lo, S. G. Baird, J. Schrier, B. Blaiszik, N. Carson, I. Foster, A. Aguilar-Granda, S. V. Kalinin, B. Maruyama, M. Politi, H. Tran, T. D. Sparks and A. Aspuru-Guzik, Digital Discovery , 2024, 3 , 842.
- 5 M. Abolhasani and E. Kumacheva, Nat. Synth. , 2023, 2 , 483. 6 K. Choudhary, B. DeCost, C. Chen, A. Jain, F. Tavazza, R. Cohn, C. W. Park, A. Choudhary, A. Agrawal, S. J. L. Billinge, E. Holm, S. P. Ong and C. Wolverton, npj Comput. Mater. , 2022, 8 , 59.
- 7 C. P. Gomes, B. Selman and J. M. Gregoire, MRS Bull. , 2019, 44 , 538.
- 8 Z. Wang, Z. Sun, H. Yin, X. Liu, J. Wang, H. Zhao, C. H. Pang, T. Wu, S. Li, Z. Yin and X. Yu, Adv. Mater. , 2022, 34 , 2104113.
- 9 A. McDannald, M. Frontzek, A. T. Savici, M. Doucet, E. E. Rodriguez, K. Meuse, J. Opsahl-Ong, D. Samarov, I. Takeuchi, W. Ratcli /uniFB00 and A. G. Kusne, Appl. Phys. Rev. , 2022, 9 , 021408.
- 10 Y. Liu, J. Yang, R. K. Vasudevan, K. P. Kelley, M. Ziatdinov, S. V. Kalinin and M. Ahmadi, J. Phys. Chem. Lett. , 2023, 14 , 3352.
- 11 M. Rashidi and R. A. Wolkow, ACS Nano , 2018, 12 , 5185.
- 12 X. Wang, Y. Jin, S. Schmitt and M. Olhofer, ACM Comput. Surv. , 2023, 55 , 287.
- 13 C. E. Rasmussen, in Advanced Lectures on Machine Learning. ML 2003. Lecture Notes in Computer Science , ed. O. Bousquet, U. von Luxburg and G. Ratsch, Springer, Berlin, 2004, vol. 176, p. 63.
- 14 A. G. Kusne, H. Yu, C. Wu, H. Zhang, J. Hattrick-Simpers, B. DeCost, S. Sarker, C. Oses, C. Toher, S. Curtarolo, A. V. Davydov, R. Agarwal, L. A. Bendersky, M. Li, A. Mehta and I. Takeuchi, Nat. Commun. , 2020, 11 , 5966.
- 15 K. Higgins, S. M. Valleti, M. Ziatdinov, S. V. Kalinin and M. Ahmadi, ACS Energy Lett. , 2020, 5 , 3426.
- 16 J. K. Pedersen, C. M. Clausen, O. A. Krysiak, B. Xiao, T. A. A. Batchelor, T. Lö /uniFB04 er, V. A. Mints, L. Banko, M. Arenz, A. Savan, W. Schuhmann, A. Ludwig and J. Rossmeisl, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. , 2021, 60 , 24144.
- 17 S. B. Harris, A. Biswas, S. J. Yun, K. M. Roccapriore, C. M. Rouleau, A. A. Puretzky, R. K. Vasudevan, D. B. Geohegan and K. Xiao, Small Methods , 2024, 8 , 2301763.
- 18 K. Bamoto, H. Sakurai, S. Tani and Y. Kobayashi, Opt. Express , 2022, 30 , 243.
- 19 C. Y. Chang, Y. W. Feng, T. S. Rawat, S. W. Chen and A. S. Lin, J. Intell. Manuf. , 2024, 1 ,1 -14.
- 20 K. M. Roccapriore, S. V. Kalinin and M. Ziatdinov, Adv. Sci. , 2022, 9 , 2203422.
- 21 Y. Liu, K. P. Kelley, R. K. Vasudevan, H. Funakubo, M. A. Ziatdinov and S. V. Kalinin, Nat. Mach. Intell. , 2022, 4 , 341.
- 22 Y. K. Wakabayashi, T. Otsuka, Y. Krockenberger, H. Sawada,
- Y. Taniyasu and H. Yamamoto, APL Mater. , 2019, 7 , 101114. 23 C. T. Nelson, R. K. Vasudevan, X. Zhang, M. Ziatdinov,
- E. A. Eliseev, I. Takeuchi, A. N. Morozovska and S. V. Kalinin, Nat. Commun. , 2020, 11 , 6361.

- 24 M. Ziatdinov, Y. Liu, K. Kelley, R. Vasudevan and S. V. Kalinin, ACS Nano , 2022, 16 , 13492.
- 25 M. A. Ziatdinov, A. Ghosh and S. V. Kalinin, Mach. Learn.: Sci. Technol. , 2022, 3 , 015003.

26 L.

P.

Swiler,

M. Gulian, A. L. Frankel, C. Sa

/uniE09D

a and

- J. D. Jakeman, J. Mach. Learn. Model. Comput. , 2020, 1 , 119. 27 E. J. Cross and T. J. Rogers, IFAC-PapersOnLine , 2021, 54 , 168. 28 E. J. Cross, T. J. Rogers, D. J. Pitchforth, S. J. Gibson, S. Zhang
- and M. R. Jones, Data-Centric Eng. , 2024, 5 , e8.
- 29 A. G. Wilson, Z. Hu, R. Salakhutdinov and E. P. Xing, Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on Arti /uniE103 cial Intelligence and Statistics, AISTATS 2016 , 2016, vol. 51, p. 370. 30 M. Valleti, R. K. Vasudevan, M. A. Ziatdinov and S. V. Kalinin,
- Mach. Learn.: Sci. Technol. , 2024, 5 , 015012.
- 31 S. L. Sanchez, E. Foadian, M. Ziatdinov, J. Yang, S. V. Kalinin, Y. Liu and M. Ahmadi, Digital Discovery , 2024, 3 , 1577.
- 32 M. A. Ziatdinov, Y. Liu, A. N. Morozovska, E. A. Eliseev, X. Zhang, I. Takeuchi and S. V. Kalinin, Adv. Mater. , 2022, 34 , 2201345.
- 33 A. Makarova, I. Usmanova, I. Bogunovic and A. Krause, Adv. Neural Inf. Process Syst. , 2021, vol. 34, p. 17235.
- 34 V. Picheny, D. Ginsbourger, Y. Richet and G. Caplin, Technometrics , 2013, 55 ,2.
- 35 J. M. Hern'andez-Lobato, M. W. Ho /uniFB00 man and Z. Ghahramani, Adv. Neural Inf. Process Syst. , 2014, 27 .
- 36 S. Daulton, S. Cakmak, M. Balandat, M. A. Osborne, E. Zhou and E. Bakshy, in Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , 2022, 162, 4831.
- 37 S. Daulton, M. Balandat and E. Bakshy, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2021, vol. 34, p. 2187.
- 38 J. Zhang, D. Semochkina, N. Sugisawa, D. C. Woods and A. A. Lapkin, Comput. Chem. Eng. , 2025, 194 , 108983.
- 39 G. Luo, X. Yang, W. Su, T. Qi, Q. Xu and A. Su, Chem. Eng. Sci. , 2024, 298 , 120434.
- 40 B. Tao, L. Yan, Y. Zhao, M. Wang and L. Ouyang, Comput. Ind. Eng. , 2025, 199 , 110749.
- 41 Z. Zanjani Foumani, M. Shishehbor, A. Yousefpour and R. Bostanabad, Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Eng. , 2023,
- 407 , 115937.
- 42 K. Swersky, J. Snoek and R. P. Adams, in Neural Information Processing Systems , ed. C. J. Burges, L. Bottou, M. Welling, Z. Ghahramani and K. Q. Weinberger, Curran Associates, Inc., 2013, p. 26.
- 43 A. Biswas, S. M. P. Valleti, R. Vasudevan, M. Ziatdinov and S. V. Kalinin, arXiv , 2024, preprint, arXiv:2402.13402, DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.2402.13402 .
- 44 R. Baddour-Hadjean, E. Raekelboom and J. P. PereiraRamos, Chem. Mater. , 2006, 18 , 3548.
- 45 M. Ziatdinov, https://github.com/ziatdinovmax/gpax , accessed: September, 2024.
- 46 Y. Liu, U. Pratiush, J. Bemis, R. Proksch, R. Emery, F. D. Rack, Y.-C. Liu, J.-C. Yang, S. Udovenko, S. Trolier-McKinstry and S. V. Kalinin, Rev. Sci. Instrum. , 2024, 95 ,093701.
- 47 A. I. J. Forrester, A. S'obester and A. J. Keane, Proc. R. Soc. A , 2007, 463 , 3251.
- 48 A. Gannepalli, D. G. Yablon, A. H. Tsou and R. Proksch, Nanotechnology , 2011, 22 , 355705.